INTERPRETING EARLY
INDIA
ROMILA THAPAR
DELHI
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
OXFORD NEW YORK
1992
bs
Î 5 '
. f l ò ((
-
J ÙC n Orfwd University Press, Walton Street, Oxford 0X2 6DP
^ '~ÌJew York Toronto
Delhi Bombay Calcutta Madras Karachi
Kuala Lumpur Singapore Hong Kong Tokyo
Nairobi Dar es SaUam
Melbourne Auckland
and mêociâte* in
Berlin Ibadan
C Oxford University Press 1992
SBN 0 19 563102 1
Typeset by Rastrixi, New Delhi 110030
Printed at Rekha Printers Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi 110020
and published by Neil O'Brien, Oxford University Press
YMCA Library Building, Jai Singh Road, New Delhi 110001
'Jnssvzo
tj r// ^i
Contents
Preface vii
Abbreviations viii
1. Ideology and the Interpretation of
Early Indian History 1
2. Durkheim and Weber on Theories of Society
and Race Relating to Pre-colonial India 23
3. Imagined Religious Communities? Ancient History
and the Modem Search for a Hindu Identity 60
4. The Contribution of D.D. Kosambi to Indology 89
5. Early India: an Overview 114
6. Society and Historical Consciousness:
The Itihasa-puram Tradition 137
Index 174
The essays included here were originally published in:
1. ICS. Krishnaswamy et al. (eds.), Society and Change. Essays in
Honour of Sachin ChaudhurL Oxford University Press, Bom­
bay, 1977. pp. 1-19.
2. Sociological Theories: race and colonialism, UNESCO, Paris, 1980.
pp. 93-116.
3. Modern Asian Studies, 1989,23,2, pp. 209-231.
4. Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bombay, 1977-78 (new series),
52-53, pp. 365-284.
5. Proceedings of the Indian History Congress, Forty-fourth session
Burdwan University 1983, Delhi 1984. pp. 3-22.
6. S. Bhattacharya and R. Thapar, (eds.), Situating Indian History,
Delhi 1986.
Preface
The essays in this collection were, with two exceptions, de­
livered originally as lectures and later marginally changed for
publication. 'Ideology and the Interpretation of Early Indian
History', was given at Cornell in 1974; 'Imagined Religious Com­
munities?', was the Kingsley Martin Memorial Lecture at Cam­
bridge in 1988; The Contribution of D.D. Kosambi to Indology',
was delivered at the Asiatic Society in Bombay in 1980; and 'Early
India: an Overview', was the Presidential Address to the Indian
History Congress held at Burdwan in 1983.
All these papers, as well as those on Durkheim and Weber,
and on the Itihasa-purana tradition, are concerned with the his­
toriography and interpretation of facets of early Indian history and
society. There is an overlap of themes in some of them and this is
almost inevitable in isolated lectures. But this overlap has been
retained as it serves to emphasize particular generalizations. The
detailed treatment and the juxtaposing of the themes to the analy­
ses of the authors under discussion, do make the treatment some­
what varied. The increasing interest in the historiography of the
early period is an indicator of the awareness of the role of ideology
in historical interpretation.
ROMILA THAPAR
Abbreviations
AB0R1 Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute
C1I Corpus Inscriptionuzn Indicarum
JAOS Journal of the American Orientalist Society
JBBRAS Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic
Society
PAlOC Proceedings of the All India Orientalists Conference
Ideology and the
Interpretation of
Early Indian History
It is some times said that the interpretation of the ancient periods
of history has little historiographical interest, since they refer to
times too distant for an ideological concern to have much meaning
for contemporary society, and that the sparseness of the evidence
does not provide much margin for ideological debate. This view
would not however be valid for the interpretation of early Indian
history, where both the colonial experience and nationalism of
recent centuries influenced the study, particularly of the early
period of history.
In Europe, post-Renaissance interests, which initiated the ex*
tensive study of the andent world, brought to this study the
ideological concerns of their own times.1 These concerns are also
reflected in the historiography of India,2 if not of Asia. The inter­
pretation of Indian history from the eighteenth century onwards
relates closely to the world view of European, and particularly
British historians, who provided the initial historiographical base.
1 A. Momigliano discusses some of these in his Studies in Historiography
(New York, 1966).
2 C.H. Philips, ed.. Historians of India, Pakistan and Ceylon (London, 1961),
pp. 92-3; Thapar, "Interpretations of andent Indian history/ History and
Theory, 1968, 7(3), pp. 318-35. For a comparative study, see D.G.E. Hall, ed..
Historians of South-East Asia (London, 1961); Soedjatmoko, ed.,An Introduction
to Indonesian Historiography (Ithaca NY, 1965).
2 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
The resulting theories frequently reflected, whether consciously
or not, the political and ideological interests of Europe—the his­
tory of India becoming one of the means of propagating those
interests. Traditional Indian historical writing with its emphasis
on historical biographies and chronicles was largely ignored.
European writing on Indian history was an attempt to create a
fresh historical tradition. The historiographical pattern of the In­
dian past, which took shape during the colonial period in the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, was probably similar to the
patterns which emerged in the histories of other colonial societies.
Investigation into the Indian past began with the work of the
Orientalists or Indologists—mainly European scholars who had
made India, and particularly Indian languages, their area of study.
The majority of the Indologists, and certainly the great names
among them such as Jones, Colebrooke and Wilson, were em­
ployed by the East India Company in various administrative
capacities. Trained as many of them were in the Classical tradition
of Europe, they were also familiar with the recent interest in
philology and used the opportunity to acquire an expertise in a
new area. As administrators they required a specialized knowl­
edge of traditional Indian law, politics, society and religion, which
inevitably led them to the literature in Sanskrit and Persian. Thus,
scholarly and administrative interests coalesced.
The nineteenth century saw the development of not only these
studies in India, but also the introduction of courses in oriental
languages at various European universities and elsewhere.3 The
term Indologist now came to include those who had a purely
academic interest in India and who were intellectually curious
about the Indian past. The study of Sanskrit language and litera­
ture not only gave shape to the discipline of comparative philol­
ogy, but also became the source material for the reconstruction of
andent Indian sodety. Vedic Sanskrit, the language of the Vedic
3 J.F. Staal, ed., A Reader on the Sanskrit Grammarians (Cambridge, Mass.,
1972).
IDEOLOGY AND INTERPRETATION OF EARLY INDIAN HISTORY 3
literature in particular, was used extensively in the reconstruction
of both Indian and Indo-European society, since the linguistic
connection between the two had been established. It was now
possible for scholars of Sanskrit to attempt wide-ranging inter­
pretations of what was believed to be the beginnings of Indian
history, with litde or no personal experience of the Indian reality.
One of the most influential of such scholars in his time was Max
Muller, whose full and appreciative descriptions of contemporary
Indian village communities would hardly have led one to suspect
that he had never visited India. Inevitably those who were sym­
pathetic to Indian culture tended to romanticize the ancient Indian
post. These interpretations carried the imagery and the preconcep­
tions not only of the sources, but also of those interpreting them.
By far the most influential theory to emerge from Indological
studies in the nineteenth century was the Theory of the Aryan
Race. The word arya which occurs in both the Iranian Avestan and
Vedic Sanskrit texts, was given a racial connotation, as referring
to the race of the Aryans. They were described as physically
different from the indigenous population and their cultural dis-
hnctiveness was apparent from the fact that they spojce an Jndo-
European Tanguage. It was held that large numbers of aryans,
described as a branch of the Indo-European race and language
group, invaded northern India in the second millennium BC, con­
quered the indigenous peoples and established the Vedic Aryan
culture which became the foundation of Indian culture.
The identification of language and race was seen to be a fallacy
even during the lifetime of Muller.4 Although in his later writings
he clarified his views on this identification, it was by then too late,
and the idea had taken root. It is curious that aryan should have
4 J. Leopold, 'British applications of the Aryan theory of race to India,
1850-70/ The English Historical Review, 1974,89(352), pp. 578-603. For various
interpretations of the term arya, see H.W. Bailey, 'Iranian Arya and Daha/
Transactions of the Philological Society (London, 1959), pp. 71-11; P. Thieme,
Der Fremdling in Rigveda, 1938. He has argued that the term refers to 'foreign­
er/stranger'.
4 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
been interpreted in racial terms since in the texts it refers merely
to an honoured person of high status and in the Vedic context this
would be one who spoke Sanskrit and observed the caste regula­
tions. The racial connotation may have been due to the counter-
posing of arya with dasa, in the Rg Veda, where the dasa is described
as physically dissimilar to the arya,5 This was interpreted as rep­
resenting two racial types with the aryas evolving later into the
three upper castes and the dasa remaining the lowest, included in
the hudra caste; the racial identity of each being preserved by
forbidding inter-marriage between the castes. The pre-eminence
of the arya was explained as due to the successful conquest of the
aryas over the dasas. The term varna, etymologically associated
with colour and occurring as a technical term referring to the caste
organization of society/ was used as yet another argument to
support the Aryan theory of race. It was believed to provide a
'scientific7 explanation for caste, namely, that the four main castes
represented major racial groups, whose racial identity was pre­
served by forbidding inter-marriage and making birth the sole
criterion for caste status. The latter half of the nineteenth century
in Europe was concerned with the discussion on race in the the­
ories of Gobineau and the growing interest in social evolution.
Some of the Indologists were by no means unfamiliar with this
debate.6 The distinction between aryan and non-aryan, and the
polarity of Aryan and Dravidian suggested by them for the Indian
scene, echoes to a degree which can hardly be regarded as coin­
cidental, the aryan-non-aiyan distinction and the Aryan-Semitic
dichotomy based on language and race, in the European context.
The suggested social bifurcation is also remarkably similar; the
upper castes were the aryans and the lower castes were the non-
aryans.
The belief in the Indo-European origins of both European and
Indian societies intensified the interest in Vedic aryan sources,
5 Rg Veda II. 20.8; II. 114; m. 34.9; 1.33.4; IV. 16.3; V. 29.10; X. 22.8.
6 L. Poliakov, The Aryan Myth (New York, 1974).
IDEOLOGY AND INTERPRETATION OF EARLY INDIAN HISTORY 5
since these were seen as the earliest survivals of a common past.
The village community of Vedic society was looked upon as the
rediscovery of the roots of ancient European society. It was de­
scribed as an idyllic community of gentle and passive people given
to meditation and other-worldly thoughts, with an absence of
aggression and competition.7 Possibly some of these scholars, well
disposed towards India, were seeking an escape into a utopia
distant in time and place, perhaps fleeing from the bewildering
changes overtaking them in their own times. Others were defend­
ing Indian society from its critics. Eventually the theory of Aryan
race gave way to what has come to be called the Aryan Problem,
namely, the historical role of the Indo- Aryan speaking people and
their identification in early Indian sources.
But the early nineteenth century saw a new direction in the
attitude of the administrator-scholars of the East India Company
towards Indian history. Some, although they did not romanticize
the ancient Indian past were nevertheless sympathetic in their
interpretations. Others, in increasing number, became critical of
what they called the values of ancient Indian sodety. This was in
part due to the mounting problems of governing a vast colony,
with an unfamiliar, if not alien culture. The nature of the relation­
ship between Britain and India was also undergoing change, for
trading stations were being substituted by colonial markets. The
major intellectual influence, however, was that of English Utili­
tarian philosophy. James Mill, its first ideologue in the context of
Indian history, completed his lengthy History of British India in the
early decades of the nineteenth century. Mill's History claimed to
be a critical investigation of the traditional institutions of India.
These, by the standards of nineteenth century Utilitarianism, were
found to be static, retrogressive and condudve to economic back­
wardness. He recommended a radical alteration of Indian sodety,
to be achieved by imposing the correct legal and administrative
system in India. Both the analysis and the solution suggested by
7 M. MOUer, India, What Can it Teach Us? (London, 1883), p. lOlff.
6 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
Mill suited the aims and needs of imperial requirements. His
History, therefore, became a textbook on India at the Haileybury
College/ where the British officers of the Indian Civil Service were
trained.
Further intellectual support for this view of the pre-modem
history of India was found in writings of the more eminent phil­
osophers of history of the time. Hegel, for example, remarked on
the absence of dialectical change in Indian history, and conse­
quently dismissed Indian civilization as being static, despotic in
its orientation, and outside the mainstream of relevant world
history.8
Central to this view of the pre-modem history of India, and
implicit in Mill's History, was the theory of Oriental Despotism.9
The genesis of this theory probably goes back to the Greco-Persian
antagonism, with references in Greek writing to the despotic
government of the Persians. To this was added the vision of the
luxuries of the oriental courts, a vision built partly on the luxury
trade with the east from early times, and partly on the fantasy
world of oriental courts as described in the accounts of visitors to
these regions, such as those of Ktesias at the Persian court and
Megasthenes at the Mauryan court in India. The Crusades and the
ensuing literature on the Turks doubtless strengthened the notion
of the all-powerful, despotic, oriental potentate. When interest in
the notion was revived in the eighteenth century as an explanation
for continuing empires in Asia, the focus was shifted from the
doings of the despot to the nature of the despotic state. Given the
concerns of eighteenth century France and England, the central
question was seen as that of private property in land, and the state
ownership of land.10 Once again, the accounts of ambassadors and
8 F. Hegel, Lectures on the Philosophy of History (London, 1974).
9 R. Koebner, 'Despot and despotism: Vicissitudes of a political term/
Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes, 1951,14, pp. 275-80; F. Ven­
turing 'Oriental despotism/ Journal of the History of Ideas, 1963,24, pp. 133-42
10 D. Thomer, 'Marx on India and the Asiatic mode of production,'
Contributions to Indian Sociology, 1966,9, p. 33ff.
IDEOLOGY AND INTERPRETATION OF EARLY INDIAN HISTORY 7
visitors to Mughal India such as Roe and Bernier were quoted, and
they maintained that there was an absence of the right to private
property in land.11 Some, such as Montesquieu, accepted the
theory of oriental despotism; others, such as Voltaire, doubted the
correctness of its assumptions. By the mid-nineteenth century it
had such currency in Britain that again the standard text on the
traditional economy of India used at Haileybury College was that
of Richard Jones, who endorsed the theory. Inevitably, the major
historians of the late nineteenth century in India, who also hap­
pened to be the administrators, assumed the correctness of the
theory as a precondition to their understanding of the Indian past.
Even Marx, despite his concern for dialectical movement, was not
averse to the idea with its emphasis on a static society and an
absence of change, and worked the theory into his model for Asian
society—that of the Asiatic Mode of Production.12
The absence of private property in land was central to this
model of social and economic structure. The structure was seen in
the form of a pyramid, with the king at the apex, and self-sufficient,
isolated village communities at the base. The surplus was collected
from the cultivators by the bureaucracy, and the process of re­
distribution led to its being appropriated, substantially, by the
king and the court—hence the fabulous wealth of oriental courts.
Control over the peasant communities was maintained by the state
monopoly of the irrigation system—or the hydraulic machinery,
as a more recent author has called it13—the control over which was
crucial in arid lands dependent on artificial irrigation. The subser­
vience of the peasant communities was ensured not only by ex­
tracting the maximum surplus from them, but also by investing
the king with absolute powers and divinity. The isolation of social
11 F. Bernier, Voyages de F. Bernier... (Amsterdam), 1699. T. Roe, The
Embassy of Sir Thomas Roe to India, 1615-1619 (London, 1926).
12 R. A.L.H. Gunawardana, 'The analysis of pre-colonial social formations
in Asia in the writings of Karl Marx/ The Indian Historical Review; 1976,4.
13 K. Wittfogel, Oriental Despotism (New Haven,1957).
8 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
groups was made more complete by the absence of urban centres
and effective networks of trade.
The idealization of the village community from one group of
scholars was now juxtaposed with the starkness of those support­
ing the other interpretation. This historical kaleidoscope was read­
justed when a third perspective was introduced at the start of the
twentieth century. The authors of this were Indian historians,
using the current methodology but motivated ideologically by the
national movement for independence; scholars who have been
referred to in recent writings as the nationalist historians.14 Of the
two major theories, the theory of Aryan race had their approval,
whereas that of Oriental Despotism was opposed for obvious
reasons. The former was acceptable for a number of reasons. It was
believed to be based on the most up-to-date philological evidence.
Its supposed 'scientific' explanation for caste was gratifying, in
view of the general condemnation of caste society from the stal­
warts of egalitarianism. Homo hierarchicus, if one may borrow the
phrase, stood exonerated. The depiction of Aryan society in glow­
ing terms was soothing to the sensitivities of Indian scholarship.
There was also an appeal to some middle-class Indians that the
coming of the English represented 'a reunion of parted cousins,
the descendants of two different families of the ancient Aryan
race'.15
Nationalist historical writing took up the theme, among other
things, of the importance of religion to Indian society. The bi­
polarity of the spiritual content of Indian culture and the ma­
terialist basis of western culture was seen as an essential and
inherent difference. This was in part a reaction to the earlier view,
that religion was such a central factor in traditional Indian society
that it obstructed progress—the latter being defined as social and
economic change. This view had been eagerly taken up both by
14 Such as for example, K.P. Jayaswal, Hindu Polity (Calcutta, 1924);
R.K. Mookerji, Harsha (London, 1926); H.C. Raichaudhury, The Political His­
tory of Ancient India (Calcutta, 1923), among others.
15 Keshab Chunder Sen's Lectures in India (Calcutta, 1923), p. 323.
IDEOLOGY AND INTERPRETATION OF EARLY INDIAN HISTORY 9
Christian missionaries anxious to proselytize among the more
enterprising Indian social groups, as well as by those who were
looking for a single factor whkh would explain the backwardness
of India as a colonial society.16
The nationalist historians concerned themselves with those
ideas which were necessary to nationalist polemics. They ques­
tioned individual items of historical interpretation, rather than
examining the validity of a theory as a total pattern of interpreta­
tion. Nor did they attempt to replace the existing theories by new
ones, fundamentally different from what had gone before. In a
sense, nationalist ideology delimited the nature of their questions.
However/ in spite of these weaknesses, the impact of the nation­
alist school was both considerable and necessary. The role of
ideology in historical interpretation was recognized with the high­
lighting of the ideological content of earlier interpretations. Above
all, it prepared the way for the questioning of the accepted
theories.
This has been of necessity an over-simplified sketch of the
main ideological trends in modem interpretations of early Indian
history. I would now like to consider at greater length the two
main theories to which I have referred. In selecting the Aryan
problem and Oriental Despotism for further analysis, in the light
of new evidence and methods of enquiry, my purpose is not
merely to indicate the inapplicability of the theories, but also to
suggest the nature of possible generalizations which arise in the
re-examination of accepted theories.
The questioning of the Aryan theory is based on the work in
recent years from three différent disciplines/ archaeology, linguis­
tics and social anthropology. The discovery and excavation of the
cities of the Indus civilization has pushed back the beginnings of
Indian history to the third millennium BC, and the Indus tiviliza-
16 M. Weber, The Religion of India, 1958. Glencoe, is the culmination of a
range of such views over the nineteenth century. For a discussion of the
Christian missionary position, A. Embree, Charles Grant and the Evangelicals
(London, 1962).
10 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
tion has replaced the Vedic Aryan culture as foundational to
Indian history. The dties of the Indus pre-date the Vedic culture
by at least a millennium, since the decline of the dties dates to the
early second millennium and the diffusion of Sanskrit as a part of
the Vedic culture is believed to have begun at the end of the same
millennium.17 The Indus dties epitomize a copper-age urban dvi-
lization, based on commerce both within the north-western area
of the sub-continent as well as West Asia. The earliest of the Vedic
texts, the Rg Veda, reflects a pastoral, cattle-keeping people un­
familiar with urban life. If the Aryans had conquered north­
western India and destroyed the dties, some archaeological
evidence of the conquest should have been forthcoming. In only
one part of one of the dties is there evidence of what might be
interpreted as the aftermath of conquest and even this has been
seriously doubted.18 The decline of the Indus dties is generally
attributed to extensive ecological changes. The repeated flooding
of the Indus, the rise of the water-table and salination of the land
under cultivation, the change in the course of the Sarasvati river
with a consequent encroaching of the desert and major sea-level
changes affecting the ports along the west coast, seem more con­
vincing explanations for the decline of the dties.19 Palaeo-botani-
cal analyses are suggesting a change in climatic conditions from
humid to dry.20 Unlike conquest ecological change was more
17 R. AUchin, B. AUchin, The Birth of Indian Civilisation (Harmondsworth,
1966); R.E.M. Wheeler, The Indus Civilisation (Cambridge, 1968).
18 G.F. Dales, 'New investigations at Mohen}o-daro/ Archeology, 1965,
18(2), p. 18.
19 H.T. Lamb rick, 'The Indus flood-plain and the Indus Civilisation/
Geographical Journal, 1967, 133(4), pp. 483-95; R.L. Raikes, The end of the
andent dties of the Indus/ American Anthropologist, 1964,66(2), pp. 284-99;
'Kalibangan:Death from natural causes/ Antiquity, 1965, 39(155), pp. 196-
203; 'The Mohenjo-daro floods/ Antiquity, 1965; A.V.N. Sarma, 'Decline of
Harappan cultures: A relook/ in KA.N. Sastri Felicitation Volume (Madras,
1971).
20 G. Singh, 'The Indus Valley culture (seen in the context of post-gladal
climate and ecological studies in North-West India)/ Archeology and Physical
IDEOLOGY AND INTERPRETATION OP EARLY INDIAN HISTORY 11
gradual and as the cities declined there were migrations out of the
cities as well as small groups of squatters moving in from the
neighbouring areas. Recent evidence from excavations in western
India and the Indo-Gangetic divide is pointing toward some con­
tinuity from the Indus civilization into later cultures.21 There is
little doubt now that certain facets of the Indus civilization sur­
vived into the second and first millennium cultures, in spite of the
decline of the cities. The earlier hiatus between the Indus civiliza­
tion and the Vedic culture is no longer acceptable, and the Indus
civilization has now to be seen as the bedrock of early Indian
culture.
Recent linguistic analyses of Vedic Sanskrit have confirmed
the presence of non-Aryan elements, especially Proto-Dravidian,
both in vocabulary and phonetics.22 Consequently it has been
suggested that Proto-Dra vidian could have been the earlier lan­
guage of northern India, perhaps the language of the Indus civi­
lization/ although this awaits the decipherment of the Indus script,
and that Vedic Sanskrit as the language of a particular social
group, slowly spread across the northern half of the sub-continent,
with a possible period of bilingualism, in which Vedic Sanskrit
was modified by the indigenous language.23 It is significant that
some of the Proto-Dravidian loan words in Vedic Sanskrit refer to
agricultural processes. We know from archaeological evidence
that advanced plough agriculture was known to the Indus settle­
ments24 and from the Rg Vedk hymns it is apparent that pas-
Anthropology in Oceania, 1971,6(2), pp. 177-69.
21 As for example, in the co-existence of the Black-and-Red Ware culture
with the late Harappan in western India and that of the Ochre Colour Pottery
culture and Pairited Grey Ware in the Indo-Gangetic divide and the Ganga-
Yamuna Doab.
22 A.L. Basham, The Wonder That Was India (London, 1954), p. 307; T. Bur­
row, The Sanskrit Language (London, 1965), p. 373ff; MB. Emeneau, Collected
papers (Annamalainagar, 1967), pp. 148,155.
23 M.B. Emeneau, Collected papers (Annamalainagar, 1967).
24 B.B. Lai, 'Perhaps the earliest ploughed field so far excavated anywhere
12 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
toralism and not agriculture was the more prestigious profession
among the early Aryan speakers.
Anthropological studies of Indian society have encouraged a
reappraisal of the social history of early periods. The insistence on
the precise meaning of words relating to social categories in the
sources has been all to the good. The valid distinction between
varna as caste in the sense of ritual status, and jati as caste in the
sense of actual status is again a help to the social historian. The
most useful contribution, however, has been in the study of the
formation of castes, which has made it apparent that caste society
does not require the pre-condition of different racial entities, nor
the conquest of one by the other. It does require the existence of
hereditary groups determining marriage relations, which groups
are arranged in a hierarchical order and perform services for one
another. The hierarchy is dependent on occupation, on certain
beliefs of purity and pollution, and on continued settlement in a
particular geographical location. The formation of a new caste has
therefore to be seen in terms of the historical change in a particular
region. Thus, a tribe incorporated into peasant society could be
converted into a caste.25 Occupational groups often acquired a
caste identity through the corporate entity of the guild or through
hereditary office in administration.26 Religious sects, frequently
protesting against the caste hierarchy, often ended up as castes
themselves. Possibilities of social mobility and variations in status
were linked to the historical context of time and place. Social
attitudes were often set; nevertheless, the opportunities for social
change were exploited, and the historian can no longer dismiss the
social dimension by merely referring to the unchanging rigidity of
in the world,' Puratattva, 1970-71,4, p. Iff.
25 N.K. Bose, The Hindu method of tribal absorption/ in Cultural Anthro­
pology and Other Essays (Calcutta, 1953); D. Mandelbaum, Society in India
(Berkeley, 1970).
26 R.S. Sharma, Changes in Early Medieval India (New Delhi, 1969) (DevraJ
Chanana Memorial Lecture.)
IDEOLOGY AND INTERPRETATION OF EARLY INDIAN HISTORY 13
caste society. In this context the theory of Sanskritization has been
a breakthrough in the study of social history.27
The combination of new evidence and fresh perspectives from
all these sources raises a host of new questions with reference to
the Vedic period. Evidently it was not a purely Indo-Aryan con­
tribution to Indian culture and has to be seen as an amalgam of the
Indo-European and the existing culture, which in turn requires a
clearer definition of each. Since the spread of Sanskrit, certainly in
the Ganges valley if not in the north-west as well, appears to have
occurred through a process of diffusion and less through conquest,
the motivation for the diffusion would have to be sought. One of
the possibilities suggested is that it coincided with the arrival of a
new technology at the start of the first millennium BC. This is
apparent in the use of iron in préférence to copper and the intro­
duction of the horse and the spoked wheel, both new to India.28
The ambiguity of the word ayas, copper or iron in Sanskrit, creates
some difficulties in an immediate acceptance of this idea. Vedic
Sanskrit is closely connected with priestly groups and the belief in
ritual may have accelerated the diffusion, particularly as it seems
that Vedic ritual was closely associated with knowledge of the
solar calendar providing, among other things, a more effective
control over agricultural processes. The diffusion of a language
does not require the physical presence of large numbers of native
speakers. It can often be done more effectively by influential
groups in the population adapting the new language and using
the traditional networks of communication. The spread of Sanskrit
might be more meaningfully seen as marking a point of social
change, apart from merely a change of language.
The notion of historical change, other than changing dynas­
ties, was curiously unacceptable to nineteenth century thinking on
the Indian past. The unchanging nature of society is central to the
27 M.N. Srinivas, Religion and Society among the Coorgs of South India
(Oxford, 1952).
28 R. Thapar, 'The study of society in andent India/ in Ancient Indian Social
History: Some Interprétations (New Delhi, 1978), pp. 211-39.
14 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
theory of Oriental Despotism. The span of Indian history was seen
as one long stretch of empire with an occasional change of dynasty.
Yet in fact, empires were of short duration and very infrequent.
There was only one empire in the early period, the Maury an
empire, lasting from the end of the fourth to the early second
century BC, which would even approximately qualify as an im­
perial system. It was not until the historical writing of the twen­
tieth century that some concession was made to change, and
imperial golden ages were interspersed with the dark ages of
smaller kingdoms.29
In re-examining Oriental Despotism it is not new evidence
which provides an alternative analysis, but the more careful ques­
tioning of existing sources. It is surprising that references to pri­
vate property in land should have been overlooked. The
sodo-legal texts, the dharmakastras and the early text on political
economy, the Arthakastra, list and discuss the laws and regulations
for the sale, bequest and inheritance of land and other forms of
property.30 More precise information comes from the many in­
scriptions of the period after AD 500, on stone and on copper­
plates, recording the grant of land by either the king or some
wealthy individual to a religious beneficiary, or alternatively, by
the king to a secular official in lieu of services rendered to the
king.31 These inscriptions were deciphered in the nineteenth cen­
tury, but read primarily for the data which they contained on
chronology and dynasties. In the last few decades, however, they
have become the basic source material for the study of the agrarian
structure of the first millennium AD.32 Since these were the legal
charters relating to the grants, the transfer of the land is recorded
in detail. In areas where the land granted was already under
cultivation, the person from whom the land was acquired and the
29 V. Smith, The Oxford History of India (Oxford, 1919).
30 P.V. Kane, History of Dharmaiastra (Poona, 1942), Vol.3.
31 e.g. B. Morrison, Political Centres and Culture Regions in Early Bengal
(Tucson, 1970).
32 R.S. Sharma, Indian Feudalism (Calcutta, 1965).
IDEOLOGY AND INTERPRETATION OF EARLY INDIAN HISTORY 15
person to whom the property was transferred are mentioned,
together with the location of land, the authority of the officials
under whom the transfer was completed and the consent of the
village within whose jurisdiction the land lay.
Not only do these inscriptions provide evidence of the cat­
egories of ownership of land, but where they refer to waste land
it is possible to indicate the gradual extension of the agrarian
economy into new areas. This information is of some consequence,
not merely to economic history, but also to those concerned with
the history of religion; for the extension of the agrarian economy
was generally accompanied either by Buddhist missions or by
nudeii of brahmana settlements, through which Sanskritic culture
was introduced into the new areas and the local culture of these
areas was assimilated into the Sanskritic tradition.33 The interplay
of these two levels of belief systems was a necessary process in the
delineation of Indian culture. The stress so far has been on the high
culture of the Sanskritic tradition which is inadequate for under­
standing the historical role of cultural forms.
Many of these records provide information on the rise of
families of relatively obscure origin to high social status, usually
through the channels of land ownership and administrative of­
fice.34 Those who became powerful had genealogies fabricated for
themselves, bestowing on the family ksatriya status and, if re­
quired, links with royal lineages as well Such periods of histori­
cal change demanded new professions, which professions finally
evolved into castes. For example, administrative complexities re­
lating to grants of land on a large scale needed professional scribes.
Not surprisingly the pre-eminent caste of scribes, the kayastha, are
first referred to in the sources of this period.
The importance given to a centralized bureaucracy in the
33 This is dearly reflected in the origin myths of ruling families for
instance, even in areas as seemingly remote as Chota Nagpur. The origin
myth of the NSgabansis is dearly derived from Purinic sources.
34 As for example, the Maitrakas of VaQabhi, during the fifth and sixth
centuries AD.
INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
model was perhaps a reflection, among other things, of the nine-
teenth century faith in the administrator as the pivot of the im­
perial system. For the bureaucratic system of early India was rarely
centralized, except in the infrequent periods of empire. Recruit­
ment was impersonal, and most levels of administration were
filled by local people. And it was at the more localized levels that
the effective centres of power were located. In periods of empire,
the surplus did find its way into the hands of the royal court. But
during the many centuries of small kingdoms, the income from
revenue was distributed among a large number of elite groups,
which in part explains the regional variations and distribution in
art styles, where the patron was not a distant emperor but the local
king. This tendency towards political decentralization was accen­
tuated from the post-Gupta period c. AD 600 when salaries were
computed not in cash, as in the earlier period, but in grants of
revenue and later grants of land.
Bureaucratic control over the economy/ such as it was, derived
from control over revenue collection. The hydraulic machinery
played only a marginal role. Large-scale, state-controlled irriga­
tion was rare. In the main, irrigation aids consisted of wells and
tanks, built and maintained either by wealthy land-owners or
through the co-operative effort of the village. The more relevant
question is not that of the state ownership of the hydraulic ma­
chinery, but the variation in irrigation technology and the degree
to which irrigation facilities gave an individual or an institution a
political edge over others.
The other mechanism of control according to the theory was
a belief in the divinity of kingship, which gave the king a religious
and psychological authority additional to the political. The at­
tribution of this quality of divinity to kingship was probably the
result of earlier studies on kingship and divinity in the ancient
Near East. The interrelation between divinity and political auth­
ority was never absolute in andent India. Divinity was easily
bestowed, not only on kings, but on a variety of objects, both
animate and inanimate. Far from emphasizing divinity, the kings
IDEOLOGY AND INTERPRETATION OF EARLY INDIAN HISTORY 17
of the Maury an empire were patrons of the heterodox sects, which
denied the existence of any god and ignored the notion of divinity.
Divinity was appealed to initially in the rise of monarchy as a
political form, in the first millennium DC.35 But, the maximum
references to kings as either incarnations or descendants of the
gods coincide with the period of the rise of obscure families to
kingship and the fabricated genealogies, suggesting that the ap­
peal to divinity was a form of social validation and its significance
was largely that of a metaphor. A particularly subtle aspect of the
Indian notion of authority which has not so far received adequate
attention has been the interaction of political authority with what
may be called the moral authority of the renouncer. Time and
again, the renouncer has returned to society and whilst still not
fully participating in it, has played a significant role outside the
realms of conventional political authority. Whereas political auth­
ority (rSjadharma) derives in part from the power of coercion
(danda) and religious authority from ritual and formulae (yajna,
pujS and mantra), the derivation of the authority of the renouncer
is difficult to ascertain, combining as it does elements of the
psychological, the social, the moral and the magical.
One of the more striking refutations of an aspect of Oriental
Despotism has been that involving the absence of urban centres.
The evidence for an early continuous urban economy has been
pinpointed by archaeological excavation. This, combined with
literary sources, suggests significant variations in the nature of
urbanization. That the literary sources were not fully utilized was
largely because the details of urban society occur first in the Pili
Buddhist texts, and these were not given the attention which they
deserved by those using Sanskrit sources. The cities of the Indus
civilization were smaller concentrations of population as com­
pared to those of the second urbanization, linked with iron tech­
nology and which evolved in the Ganges valley in the first
millennium BC. This had as its economic base trade within the
39 J. Spellman, Political Theory af Ancient India (Oxford, 1964).
18 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
*
sub-continent. The widespread use of coins and other adjuncts to
extensive trading relationships, such as letters of credit and prom­
issory notes, not only extended the geographical reach of trade but
considerably increased the volume of trade. Steps towards the
growth of exchange are apparent in the Buddhist literature relat­
ing to the cities of the Ganges valley; but this is less evident in the
growth of the dties of maritime south India at the end of the first
millennium, where archaeology has corroborated the literary ref­
erences to a lucrative trade with the Roman empire.
At another level attempts have been made to correlate certain
religious movements to the needs of urban groups. The work on
the rise and spread of Buddhism and Jainism in relation to the
mercantile community has inspired a wider debate on aspects of
the bhakti movements as being in part the religion of urban groups
with elements of dissident thought or, for that matter, the inves­
tigation of the Hindu temple as an economic entrepreneur.36 The
outcome of such studies is likely to lead to a rather radical revision
of Max Weber's thesis on the social and economic role of religion
in India.
In suggesting that these two theories—the Aryan theory and
Oriental Despotism—emanating from ideologies pertinent to
nineteenth century Europe, are now no longer tenable, it may
appear as if I am tilting at windmills. Yet, it is surprising how
deeply rooted these theories are, both in India and elsewhere, and
how frequently they are revived for reasons of academic study as
well as in political polemics. The theory of Aryan race has not only
served cultural nationalism in India but continues to serve Hindu
revivalism and, inversely, anti-brahman movements. At the aca­
demic level, the insistence on ascribing Indo-European roots to all
aspects of Vedic culture has acted as a restraint on the analysis of
mythology, religion and cultural symbols from the historical point
of view. The intellectual history of a period as rich as that of the
36 B. Stein,'Social mobility and medieval South Indian Hindu sects/
Camparatwe Studies in Society and History, 1968, suppt 3, pp. 78-94.
IDEOLOGY AND INTERPRETATION OP EARLY INDIAN HISTOR? 19
Uptmiqads and early Buddhism, approximately the mid-first mil­
lennium BC, has been hemmed in by the constraints of seeing it in
terms of an internal movement Among dissident aryans, rather
than from the more meaningful perspective of a period of seminal
change. The perennial search for 'the Aryans' continues apace,
with archaeologists still attempting to identify a variety of ar­
chaeological cultures as Aryan.37
Oriental Despotism was revived a few decades ago in
WittfogeTs assessment of bureaucratic systems and in association
with an oblique critique of the Soviet system. The reincarnation of
the theory as the Asiatic Mode of Production has had, I believe, an
even fuller transfusion in recent Soviet assessments of the Chinese
past as it has from time to time at the academic level in more
general economic analyses of historical change in Asia.
That the interpretation of ancient Indian History was subject
to the polemics of political ideology was inevitable. Colonial situa­
tions tend to play on the political content of historical interpreta­
tion. The sanctity of ancient culture as seen through a nationalist
vision made it sensitive to historical analysis. This is not to deny,
however, that over the last two centuries, at the level of the
discovery of evidence, the scholarship has been both meticulous
and extensive. Earlier theories of interpretation have not been
replaced as there is now a concern with the need for clearer
definitions of historical concepts based on a larger body of precise
evidence. This is most apparent in the current debate on the
periodization of Indian history. Nevertheless, for a while there
was a disinclination to move away from the subject of polemics.
Symbolic of this disinclination was the consistent overlooking
of one significant aspect of historical interest the traditional In­
dian understanding of its own past It has long been maintained
that the Indians were an a-historical people, since there was no
recognizable historical writing from the Indian tradition similar to
37 e.g. B.B. Lai, 'Excavations at Hastinapurt... / Ancient India, 1954-1955,
10 and 11, pp. 5-51.
20 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
that from Greece and China. This was in part because the Indian
historical tradition — the iiihasa-purana, as it is called — was in a
fo rm not easily recognizable to those familiar with Greek historical
writing. Another reason may have been the inability of modem
scholars to perceive and concede the awareness of change, so
necessary to a sense of history, in the itihasa-purSm, and this
precluded them from seeing the historical basis of the tradition.
The early Indian historical tradition which is now receiving
the attention of historians and is being analysed in terms of its
ideological content does reflect a distinct image of the past, and its
concerns are different from those of modem interpretations of the
past.38 For instance, the unit of histoiy is not the empire but the
janapada, the territory settled by a tribe, which later evolves into a
state, generally a kingdom. References are made to emperors as
universal rulers, the samraf and the cakravartin, but these are at the
abstract level. Reality revolves around the kings of smaller king­
doms. The genealogical sections of the tradition explain the settle­
ments of tribes, and with the emergence of states, the association
of dynasties.39 But the past was not recorded as a succession of
political events, for the legitimization of political authority was
more important and it was to this that the historical tradition gave
precedence. The records of these early genealogies were used from
the first millennium AD onwards for legitimizing new dynasties
who were given links with the ancient royal lineages. Recent work
in social history has shown that political power was a relatively
open area in early Indian society and the social antecedents of the
founders of dynasties were rarely questioned, as long as they
complied with the procedures necessary for legitimizing political
authority.
38 Publications on this tradition are F.E Pargiter, The Ancient Indian His­
torical Tradition (London, 1922); V.S. Pathak, Ancient Historians of India (Lon­
don, 1966); and A.K. Warder, An Introduction to Indian Historiography
(Bombay, 1972).
39 R. Thapar, 'Genealogy as a source of social history/ op.cit., 1976, pp. 326-
60.
IDEOLOGY AND INTERPRETATION OF EARLY INDIAN HISTORY 21
In the Buddhist tradition the unit of history was the Sangha or
Buddhist Church and monastic chronicles formed the core of the
tradition. These were not merely the history of the Elders of the
Church, for the monastery as an important socio-religious institu­
tion played an active political role and its relationship with politi­
cal authority is apparent from these chronicles.40
Cyclic time and the change implicit in the movement of the
cycle was the cosmological reflection of the consciousness of
change. Even more interesting is the evolution in the form and
style of the historical tradition itself, in the latter part of the first
millennium AD, when the record includes details of events relating
to political authority—in short, the kind of literature which is
easily recognizable as historical writing, consisting of biographies
of rulers and statesmen and chronicles of dynasties.41 This new
development in the tradition coincides with actual historical
change, characterized by small kingdoms generally conforming to
the geographically nuclear regions. These were based on a de­
centralized administration and economic structure,, with an exten­
sion of patronage to local cultures and the emergence of the
devotional religion — the bhdkti movement—which, through its
appeal to a large cross-section of social groups and its use of the
regional language, strengthened the regional focus.
Yet the link with the mainstream of the tradition was not
broken. Into the early history of the region or the dynasty is woven,
quite deliberately, the mythology and lineages of the earlier tradi­
tion. The network of Sanskritic culture at least at the upper levels
of society was a more real bond between people and places than
the mere inclusion of these within the confines of an empire.
The perspective of the ancient Indian historical tradition when
seen in juxtaposition with the more recent analyses of early Indian
history, apart from its inherent intellectual interest, can suggest
40 L.S. Perera, 'The Pali chronicle of Ceylon/ in Philips, ed., op. at, 1961,
p. 29ff.
41 Such as Banabhatta's Harsacarita, Bilhana's VtkramSnkadeoacarita, Kal-
hana's Rajatarangitu and various vambavalis.
22 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
the ideological concerns of the pre-colonial period. These might
provide to the historian of early India a clearer vision of the
priorities of the Indian past than have been provided by the
polemics of more recent times
Durkheim and Weber
on Theories of Society
and Race Relating to
Pre-colonial India*
This paper is concerned with the ideas of Durkheim and Weber
in relation to pre-colonial India. An attempt is made to ex­
amine the colonial comprehension of India, and its influence on
these two sociologists—a comprehension which included both
early and contemporary India. Such a projection from one histori­
cal period onto another was, in many ways, a characteristic of
eighteenth and nineteenth century European studies of India.
Whatever seemed alien to the European perspective of contem­
porary India was often visualized as a survival from earlier times
and the presumed continuity was imbued with historical authen­
ticity. More frequently the social institutions from the past were
believed to persist virtually unchanged into the present and made
it legitimate for those studying contemporary Indian society to
concern themselves with the texts of earlier periods. Such chro­
nological glissandos were played by both evolutionists and func­
tionalists.
As far as India was concerned, the focus of study was on caste
which was seen as the distinctive feature of Indian civilization.
This in turn required analyses of Indian religion and the racial
* I am grateful to my colleague Dr Satish Sabarwal for his helpful criticism
of an earlier draft of this paper.
24 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
composition of the Indian people, since religion and race were
seen as essentials of caste. Both Durkheim and Weber tended to
concentrate on the former as the more important factor, but this
did not preclude a discussion on the latter.
Unlike Weber, Durkheim has written little directly on India.
The impact of his thinking is more apparent in the works of his
disciples—the sociologists Marcel Mauss, Henri Hubert and Céle-
stin Bouglé—and to some extent on a number of Indologists such
as G. Held, G. Dumézil and P. Masson-Oursel. Nevertheless,
Durkheim occasionally used the existing studies on Indian civil­
ization to highlight some of his generalizations. The most often
quoted example of this is his argument that religion cannot be
defined as a belief in gods since Theravada Buddhism, widely
accepted as a religion, did not postulate a belief in gods.
Durkheim's concern with the origins of moral and social systems
and the dichotomy of the sacred and the profane would have lent
itself admirably to an analysis of the interrelations between caste
and religion in India, but this clearly was a region with which he
felt himself to be unacquainted.1
Marcel Mauss and Henri Hubert published a pioneering study
on the ritual of sacrifice, Sacrifice : its nature and function, in which
the Vedic literature with its wealth of detail on the central ritual
of Vedic life, the yajiia (sacrificial ritual) provided the authors with
what was until then comparatively new data among sociologists.
Earlier studies had centred on Tyloi^s evidence as discussed in
Primitive culture and that of Robertson-Smith's work in The religion
of the Semites. These studies were based in part on observation (not
always of a very systematic kind) with descriptions which were
patchy and not nearly as meticulous in detail as were the Vedic
texts. Above all, the Vedic texts were sacrificial manuals per se.
Frazer's attempt to universalize the theories on sacrifice had com­
plicated the process of analytical investigation. Hubert and Mauss
1 E. Durkheim, 'De la definition des phenomenes religieux', V année
Sociologique, II (Paris, 1899), pp. 1-28.
DURKHEIM AND WEBER 25
were attempting to apply Durkheim's theories to a new area of
evidence, a procedure which was to be repeated in some of the
essays in the collections published as, Mélanges d'histoire des re­
ligions, and more specifically by Mauss in Essai sur le don. Sub­
sequently Masson-Oursel in his chapters in the collection entitled
Ancient India and Indian civilisation has tried to separate the magical
elements from the rational in the structure of early Hinduism and
has posed the problem of the expectation of worldly success in the
performance of religious rituals. These ideas have been further
developed by Heesterman in a study on the ancient Indian sacrifi­
cial ritual, The ancient Indian royal consecration. Held has used the
Durkheimian method more directly in an analysis of the MahS-
bhârata basing himself on a statement from Marcel Mauss, 'Le
Mahabhârata est l'histoire d'un gigantesque potlatch'.2 In The
Mahabhârata: an ethnological study, Held argues that the Kauravas
and the Pandavas were two phratries and that dicing and war were
both part of the symbol of potlatch competitions; that the mythol­
ogy of the epic revolves around notions of early classifications,
such as the constant use of the number five and the cyclic concept
of cosmic movement; and that the text distinguishes between the
sacred act (karma) and sacred knowledge (jnàna) particularly in its
didactic sections. More recently Dumézil has acknowledged the
influence of Durkheim in his studies of Indo-European society and
mythology. He argues that all Indo-European societies reflect a
three-fold social division (the priest, the warrior and the com­
moner, what he calls the tripartite function) in the arrangement of
their mythologies relating to the deities they worshipped. This in
a sense overarches the religious and racial perspective.
Among the nineteenth and early twentieth century analyses
of caste in India, Bouglé's work, deriving as it did from
Durkheim's ideas of community, religion and stratification, intro­
duced a new dimension and shifted the focus from race and
2 M. Mauss, Essai sur le Don (Paris 1925), p. 143. (trans. The Gift, New York
1967).
26 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
occupation to new categories of stratification. It is unfortunate that
his book Essays on the caste system remained untranslated from the
French for half a century; certainly its impact on studies of caste
would have had a greater significance. Both Mauss and Bougie
were interested in the Indian data largely because it provided new
source material on a society which had not been extensively inves­
tigated by sociologists. They were interested in the difference per
se between Indian society and those with which they were already
familiar. Caste society was for BougU a contrastive study in a
wider area of sociological concern—the study of egalitarianism 3:
a trend which has continued until recent times as is demonstrated
by Louis Dumont's work Homo hierarchicus.
Weber had a more clearly defined purpose in using the Indian
material. He was setting up a model of Indian society in order to
prove a series of theses regarding modem European society. The
non-European tradition was essential to his analysis not only as a
contrastive study but more specifically in order to explain the
absence of the emergence of capitalism in areas other than western
Europe. His study of Asian religions (India and China) focused on
the intermeshing of religion and economic life. Weber was among
those who subscribed to the critique of Marx by pointing to what
he thought were the inadequacies of Marxist explanation. Capi­
talism, therefore, was not the result of an historical evolution but
a unique development which had it9 roots in seventeenth-century
western Europe. In order to demonstrate his analysis, he had to
use contrastive models from traditions other than the European.
A precondition to his analysis was the assumption that there were
factors in the European situation which made it significantly
different from all others and by implication substantially more
effective in terms of world history. Weber's interest in the non-
European past was not therefore in the essential difference with
the European, but in testing and proving a hypothesis concerning
the European past.
3 C. Bougie, Essays on the Caste System (Cambridge, 1971), p. vil. (Originally
published 1908 in French).
DURKHEIM AND WEBER 27
The choice and comprehension of the Indian material was to
some extent conditioned by the use which these sociologists
wished to make of it. The reliability and the range of the source
material which was available to them by the end of the nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries when they were writing is another
question which has to be considered. By this time the Indian
pre-colonial past had been interpreted by a large number of soph­
isticated ideologues who, under the guise of the newly-found
objectivity of the nineteenth century, were supporting a variety of
preconceptions or what they believed were definitive models. In
most cases the interpretations were highly coloured by the intel­
lectual preconceptions current in Europe at the time.
The problem of source material operated at two levels. One
was that those who were not professional Indologists had to use
the sources in translation. This was crucial to the question of
interpretation. Terms relating particularly to social organization
could only be translated and interpreted in the light of current
research. Those for example who were reliable scholars of Sanskrit
were not necessarily acquainted with the nuances of sodal forms
and stratification. Consequently, the translation of concepts could
result in misunderstandings. For example, the notion of race was
embedded in the European intellectual consciousness in the nine­
teenth century. The universality of the concept was sought to be
proved by translating various words as 'race' from the literatures
of non-European societies even where the concept of race did not
exist. Thus Monier-Williams, an undoubtedly outstanding San-
skritist and the compiler of the standard Sanskrit dictionary, refers
to race as lineage and proceeds to translate a series of terms
essentially connected with descent groups and kinship relations
as 'race'—vamba, kulajSti, gotra,jana, varna4 None of these words
could today be translated as race. Similarly, the frequently used
term, rnti, in the Pali texts, now often translated as phratry or as
4 M. Monier-Williams, A Sanskrit-English Dictionary (New York, 1976),
p. 652.
28 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
extended kin-group, was also earlier translated as race. The un­
derstanding of caste as described in the DharmaèSstra of Manu
would naturally take on a strange coloration if references to
varna and jâti were translated as race. This particular example is
interlinked with the fact that most nineteenth century theories
explaining the origin of caste saw it primarily as a system of
demarcating the identities of various racial groups and maintain­
ing separation.
At the other level, the sources of India available to those who
were not professional Indologists were generally limited. The
primary data on caste was taken from the Census Reports and the
Imperial Gazetteers for the contemporary period and from the
translations of the Dharmaéâstras, the sodo-legal texts, for earlier
times. The former category was compiled by officials of the Gov­
ernment of India and naturally reflected the conceptual biases then
current on the pre-colonial Indian past among British admini­
strators who were also, in the main, the scholars in the field. For
the religions of India there were again the translations of the texts
and the works of Indologists such as Zimmer, Oldenberg, Fick,
Hopkins or historians such as Vincent Smith and Grant Duff.
The investigation of Indian society by European scholars had
begun in a systematic way in the late eighteenth century. A major
strand in the early interpretations was what became well known
in the nineteenth century as the Aryan Theory. It derived academic
sanction from the work of comparative philologists such as Max
Müller, Auguste Pictet and Christian Lassen, ideological sanction
from the essays of the Comte de Gobineau and political sanction
by the end of the nineteenth century from the competing im­
perialism of the West European nations. The basis of the theory
was the equation of language and race/in Europe the major
dichotomy was seen as between Aryan and Semitic and in India it
became Aryan and Dravidian, with the upper castes seen as the
descendants of the Aryans. The association of the theory with
India had its genesis in the philological relationships noticed
between Sanskrit and Greek, Latin and other European languages.
DURKHEIM AND WEBER 29
The Aryans it was argued were implicitly superior to the
non-Aryans as they were the initial conquerors who had founded
civilizations in Europe and Asia. In India, the arrival of the Aryans
was associated with the compilation of the Rg Veda and this was
believed to be the bed-rock of Indian civilization, the excavation
of the Indus civilization not as yet having taken place. By the late
nineteenth century, the fallacy of equating language with race had
been clearly demonstrated. Nevertheless, the theory remained
established in European thought with reference to India. It also
became acceptable to the new middle-class élite in India as it could
call itself Aryan, differentiate itself from the lower castes believed
to be non-Aryan and even seek a connection with the British rulers
who represented European aryandom.5
^ Caste society was explained as being based on radal segrega­
tion with the Aryans forming the higher castes. The system was
defended as a scientific division of society based on racial group­
ing, where the identity was preserved by rigid laws of marriage.
The notion that caste society was essentially a system of racial
segregation grew, in part, out of a linguistic misapprehension. The
two most frequently used Sanskrit words referring to caste are
t>arna and jàti. The latter quite dearly refers to descent and derives
from the root jatta—to be bom. Varna on the other hand, which is
used to categorize the four groups (brahmano, ksatriya, vaibya and
èùdra), has been derived from a root meaning colour. This was
immediately interpreted with reference to human pigmentation
and colour in the racial sense by the early translators of the texts.
That the racial connotation is suggested by the translators is clear
from the entry under varna in the Monier-Williams dictionary.6
From the texts it would seem that the connotation of colour is
symbolic since the four colours associated with the groups are
white, red, yellow and black.7 Social differentiation symbolized in
5 Keshab Chunder Sen's Lectures in India, p. 323.
6 M. Monier-Williams, A SansJferif-En^/isJi Dictionary (New York, 1976),
p. 924 qv. tttrna.
7 MahJbhSrata 12.181.5ff. refers to the four varnas as symbolized by the
30 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
colours is not unusual in the traditions of many early societies.
Additional support for the racial basis of caste was sought from
the references in the fig Veda to the initial division of society into
the arya-varm and the dSsa-varna wherein the latter is described
as being constituted of short-statured and dark-complexioned
people,8 but the description of the former is vague.
Apart from the rather simplistic racial dichotomy, other as­
pects were introduced gradually as caste came to be seen as the
foundation of Indian social structure. Earlier, Max Muller in Chips
from a German workshop had argued that the radal factor was not a
sufficient explanation for the evolution of caste and had added two
more: conquest and political formation and professional or oc­
cupational groups. To these, Alfred Lyall had added a fourth, the
religious sectarian factor, arguing that religious sectarian move­
ments could also evolve into castes and this evolution was the
reflection of the divisive tendencies inherent in Indian society.9
Ibbetson took the argument further and suggested that three fac­
tors were important: the creation of guilds founded on hereditary
occupation, the exaltation of the sacerdotal function and the im­
portance attributed to heredity. Caste was consolidated by a series
of laws regulating marriage alliances, the purity of food and
colours white, red, yellow and black, the differentiaion of which comes about
after a preliminary period when all varrua were identical. The same sequence
of colours is used in connection with the four epochs (yugos) 3.148.5-37.
8 Rg Veda 1.130.8.; 5.29.10.; 9.41.1.
9 A. Lyall, Asiatic Studies (London, 1889); D.C.J. Ibbetson, Report on the
Census of the Punjab taken on 17th February 1881 (Calcutta, 1883); J.C. Nes field.
Brief View of the Caste System of the North-western Provinces and Oudh, together
unth an Examination of Names and Figures shown in the Census Report, 1882.
(Allahabad, 1895); H.H. Risley, The People of India (London, 1908). These were
all officials involved in the administration of India and contributed to the
collection of census data and studies of castes and tribes in British India
during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. In contrast to the
British writing on this subject which came mainly from administrators,
French studies on society and religion in India came from professional
scholars of Sanskrit and from sodologists.
DURKHEIM AND WEBER 31
interqiste relations. The consolidation was largely within the
framework of brShmana authority and power. Nesfjeld argued that
occupation was the dominant causative factor. He favoured an
evolutionary pattern from tribe to caste where marriage rules and
behaviour taboos reflect tribal forms in caste and the occupation
taken up by the tribe on the decline of the tribal form identified its
caste status. Status was largely determined by whether the occupa­
tion was of a pre-metal working society and therefore low or of a
post-metal working society and therefore high. The brahmana,
however, remained always the highest caste.
Risely revived the racist theory in his The people of India (1908).
He argued that there was a tribal genesis to caste, a memory of
which is retained in the exogamous groups such as the gotras. But
this soon gave way to primarily ethnological distinctions, the germ
of which lies in the enemity of the white and black races as
expressed in the Srya-varna and the dOsa-varna of the Rg Veda. The
segregation was maintained by carefully worked out endogamous
laws. He took very literally the Brahmanical idea that all low status
castes are necessarily the product of interbreeding. The hierarchy
of caste was based on an ethnological distinction between the
Aryans retaining their purity as the highest castes and the ab­
original inhabitants of India being clustered at the lower end.
Risely maintained that race was the generating principle and he
used ethnographic measurement particularly the nasal index in
an attempt to prove his theory.
A rather different point of view was put forward by Senart in
his Les castes dans I'Inde (1896). He was dissatisfied with the racial
theory. He felt that the emphasis on occupation as the crucial
variable was exaggerated since caste distinctions were known
even among people in the same profession. Senart sought the
answer to the origins of caste in the constitution of the family.
Caste has the same rights over individuals as do early families in
other ancient societies such as the Greeks and the Romans. En­
dogamous laws were also fundamental to these societies (e.g. the
jus connubii of Rome). Laws of commensality in caste were in­
32 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
tended to exclude the aliens from sacrifices and religious feasts
since a meal signifies sharing and equality. Even the fear of im­
purity and defilement has analogies from Greco-Roman parallels.
The origin of caste requires a multi-causal explanation. He ac­
cepted that there was initially a conflict between the Aryans and
the dark-skinned race of inferior civilization which resulted in a
strengthening of the exclusiveness of the Aryans. Gradually how­
ever there was an admixture of races and apart from the extensive
family groups which developed into castes, function-based
groups of a mixed origin also developed into castes. The sacerdotal
power strengthened itself and worked out the ideal caste system—
the varna system. Notions of purity made the exclusion more rigid
and prevented absorption into the indigenous population. As in
the case of the Greeks, it also preserved the higher castes from
performing manual labour. The unending justification of social
distinctions was endorsed by the concept of metempsychosis. The
continuity of caste was largely due to the absence of a political
authority to cut across these divisions and unify them.
The theory of the absence of political authority derived in part
from the current notion that the Indian village community con­
tributed to the consolidation of caste since it subsumed common
territory, kin and jurisdiction. It was an organic and integral unit
which managed to maintain its autonomy from the political super­
structure. Max Müller had described it in glowing terms as an
idyllic community10 and it became one of the tenets of nineteenth-
century colonial sociology. The village community was also seen
as the root of Indo-European life and it was thought that in the
Indian village community Europe had rediscovered its origins.
Less romantically, Marx argued that the Indian village community
was one of the causes of the stagnation of Indian society.11 Henry
Maine saw it as a point along the linear form of the social growth
of society from a kin-organized system to a commercial-industrial
10 M. MQller, India, What Can It Teach Us? (London, 1883), pp. 15,101.
11K. Marx and F. Engels, On Colonialism (Moscow, 1968), p. 41.
DURKHEIM AND WEBER 33
society.12 Lyall took the argument of an absence of political auth­
ority still further and argued that India was at 'an arrested stage
of development'. According to him, the evolutionary stage of the
tribe was still prevalent (as in parts of Rajasthan) which was
a survival from an earlier social form. The absence of political
stability was due to an absence of the political institutions required
to counterbalance monarchical power.
The notion of Indian society reflecting an early, if not a primi­
tive, stage in social evolution or demonstrating a form of arrested
growth was also implicit in another widely-accepted theory which
pertained more closely to the nature of political and economic
forms in Asia—the theory of Oriental Despotism. Its main postu­
lates were, the existence of isolated, self-sufficient village com­
munities, superimposed upon which was the despotic ruler and
his court who creamed the surplus off the peasantry through a
very efficient bureaucratic machinery. The latter was not only the
mechanism for revenue collection but also ran the State-controlled
irrigation system upon which all cultivation was dependent. The
diVir e origin of the king also helped to create the appropriate
distance. Since it was believed that there was no private property
in land, it was argued that there were no intermediary groups
between king and peasant nor, therefore, any political institutions
to counterbalance the monarchy. The economic autarchy of the
village community allowed it a political autonomy except for the
mechanism of revenue collection which impinged on the aut­
onomy. There was also an absence of urban centres specializing
the production of commodities for a market which, had they
existed, might have been the basis for a political check on des­
potism and might have encouraged economic change.
The theory, partially subscribed to by historians such as James
Mill in the early nineteenth century, gained ground in England
over the decades and by the middle of the century was axiomatic
to the understanding of Indian society and politics. Inevitably, it
12 H.S. Maine, Village Communities in the East and West (New York, 1974),
(reprint), p. 22ff.
34 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
was reflected to a greater or lesser degree in the reports compiled
by British administrators working in the districts. Others too were
not left untouched. Marx in his discussion on colonialism in India
used this theory to explain what he regarded as the political
stagnation and economic backwardness of India which facilitated
the British conquest. The Indian village community was for Marx
a survival from the past and, consequently, an anachronism which
had to be done away with if the condition of arrested growth were
to cease.
The assumption in these theories was that there is a contrastive
difference between the Indian and the European experience. This
difference can be explained by locating its causes. The meth­
odological approach was to assume that the Indian experience had
failed since Indian society had not evolved to a capitalist form and
it was important to try and discover why it had failed. Basic to this
assumption was the notion that Indian society reflected a stepping
off, as it were, from the escalator of social evolution. This in brief
was the intellectual background to the views current in Europe on
Indian society. Even where these views were questioned or dis­
carded, the rejection has to be seen in terms of the prevalent ideas.
The inability of certain societies to evolve into a capitalist form
became a major characteristic in differentiating various societies.
This distinction also lay at the centre of sociological thought for
many decades and was expressed in a variety of supposed opposi­
tions—gesellsehafl: gemeinschaft, folk: urban, status: contract and,
ultimately, tradition: modernity.
Marx had earlier brought to a head the question of the primacy
of ideas or social facts. The question arose repeatedly in later
writing not only as part of the critique of Marxism but as a
controversial issue in itself. Durkheim moved gradually from a
position of regarding ideas and beliefs as a derivative of a subsect
of social facts towards suggesting that symbolic thought is a con­
dition of and explains society.13 Durkheim's ideas on the sociology
13 S. Lukes, Emile Durkheim: His Ufe end Work (London, 1973), p. 235ff.
DURKHEIM AND WEBER 35
of religion were important in the analysis of Indian society since
religion was often regarded as the crucial variable which gave a
particular direction to Indian society, a point of view more fully
elaborated by Weber. That the essential elements of religious
thought are to be found in seminal form in primitive religion or at
any rate, 'it is easier to see the forms at an early stage', is suggestive
of an element of evolutionism in Durkheim's argument. There was
a tendency to classify religio-sodal phenomena into two cat­
egories: one pertaining to pre-literate societies and the other to
literate societies. The Durkheimian interest was essentially in the
former with its emphasis on totemism, magic, matrilineal society,
the overarching deity and pre-logical thinking, which makes this
imperative as a starting point Religion was pre-eminently a social
phenomenon. Although the factual correctness of his use of inter­
relationships between totem and clan and his reliance on dubious
ethnography have been criticized14 nevertheless his views on
religion have been used to correlate religious forms and social
realities in Indian society, which have further strengthened the
hypothesis of the particular role of religion in Indian society. Since
Durkheim's views were largely limited to the religion of primitive
societies, their application to Indian data was mainly in the form
of recognizing primitive survivals in religious rites and beliefs of
the early historical period. Few attempts have been made to apply
them to the religious systems of 'tribal India' current even today.
The application of his views to more advanced forms of religion
in India were limited owing partially to his own initial hesitations
in extending his ideas to more complex religious forms.
Durkheim's own analysis did not pertain centrally to Indian
religion and even where he uses the absence of deity in Buddhism
to point up his definition of religion he is not concerned with any
detailed understanding of Buddhism. He argues that the turning
in of man upon himself in the process of meditation allows the
absence of a deity, a point made by earlier Indologists such as
14 Ibid., p. 477ff.
36 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
Oldenberg and Barth.15 Nevertheless, Buddhism is a religion since
it admits of the existence of sacred things. Buddhism, Jainism and
Hinduism enter the discussion again when Durkheim argues that
altruistic suicide is a form of sacrifice arising out of a sense of duty
and not unrelated to pantheistic beliefs. Durkheim's division of
religious phenomena into beliefs and rites reappeared in later
studies of the Vedic sacrifice.
^Hubert and Mauss analysed the ritual of sacrifice in some
detail with frequent reference to the texts on the early Vedic
sacrifices. They asserted that the ritual implied the consecration of
a common object to a religious plane and that it symbolized the
separation of the sacred and the profane. This separation is in­
herent all the time but can only be actualized through the media­
tion of religious agents. The separation is apparent at many levels:
the area where the sacrifice takes place is demarcated as sacred,
the priest communicating with the god is sacred in the sacrificial
context as also is the sacrifiant and the mundane animal now
consecrated as the sacrificial victim. Outside of a sacred place
immolation is murder. As the texts put it, he who performs the
sacrifice, 'passes from the world of men into the world of gods'.16
The preparation for consecration is as elaborate as that of dé­
sacralisa tion. The sacrificer purifies himself by being in a condition
of sanctity and redeems himself by substituting the victim in his
place. Sacrifice therefore also becomes a procedure of communica­
tion between the sacred and the profane worlds. Mauss elsewhere
develops the argument with reference to dSna (gift giving) which
is generally treated as a purely religious action, but he views it as
a form of gift-exchange. Using the lengthy discussion on the ritual
of dàna as stated in the Anu&sanparvan of the Mahabhdrata as his
data, Mauss argues that a routine action of making a gift can
15 H. Oldenburg, The Buddha (London, 1922), p. 214ffj M. Weber, The
Religion of India (Glencoe, 1958), p. 146; Quoted in W.S.F. Pickering, Durkheim
on Religion (Boston, 1975), p. 80 ff.
16 ¿atapatha Brtihmana, 1.1.1.Iff.
DURKHEIM AND WEBER 37
become a sacred rite depending on the donor, the recipient, the
place and the intention with which the gift is made, all of which
are listed in the text as important factors in the process of dana.
Alternatively, the same ritual can be seen as establishing the
secular relationships implicit in a gift-exchange.
The bipolarity of the sacred and the profane in the Vedic
sacrificial ritual can be seen as embodying social representations
in as much as it can be argued that this was also germinal to the
idea of purity and pollution with reference to caste groups. The
purity of the brShmana was partly derived from his condition of
sanctity at the time of the yajna, and the exclusion of the other
castes may have been measured in terms of their social distance
from the sacrificial enclosure. Thus, the ksatriya was frequently the
yajamSna, he who has the sacrifice performed, and could therefore
be admitted as a participant. The other castes were at best ob­
servers from a distance.
Gearly, this was but one aspect of caste differentiation and for
Bougie it was by no means the central. Closer to his interest was
Durkheim's distinction between mechanical solidarity and or­
ganic solidarity underlying which was the notion of pre-industrial
and industrial society. The morphological structure of the first
which Durkheim characterized as the segmental type—a clan-
based society moving to territorial identity—was to be a repeated
feature in the discussion on caste. Such societies according to
Durkheim, were not based on a division of labour and lacked a
fusion of markets and the growth of cities both of which were
noticeable in organic solidarity. Other characteristics of the first
category were the relatively weak interdependence between the
segments, rules with repressive sanctions and the prevalence of
penal law and absolute collective authority with little room for
individual initiative. Such a society also placed a premium on
values relating to society as a whole in its ethical forms, manifested
a highly religious conscience and emphasized the transcendental.
The transformation from mechanical solidarity to organic soli­
38 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
darity was for Durkheim the central focus of social change with
its attendant social integration.17
Bouglé examined caste in the light of the definition of mechan­
ical solidarity. He began by investigating whether caste was in­
digenous to Hindu society alone or was common to all societies at
some stage. He includes among the characteristics of caste the
following four hereditary specialization; hierarchy and the ine­
quality of rights; a dear opposition between elementary groups
which isolate themselves through a series of taboos relating to
food, contact, dothing etc., and which resist unification; and the
inddence of mobility being collective rather than individual.
When considering the roots of the system, Bouglé disagrees with
the explanation that the brahmmtas were the originators of caste
using it to divide and control sodety which he felt laid too great
an emphasis on religion. The theories of some Indologists who saw
caste evolving out of industrial guilds and therefore gave pro­
minence to hereditary specialization were also unacceptable to
Bouglé, for this would require an equation of caste with economic
function and occupation, and such an equation is thwarted by a
series of overlapping relations in caste. Senart had listed three
groups among the Sryas: the sacerdotal who had appropriated the
sacrifidal ritual, the aristocracy founding itself on heredity, and
the common people. These three divisions provided the impetus
for further divisions and the separation of the Arya from the
non- Arya. Senart was looking at the origins of caste with reference
to varna. For Bouglé the protypes of caste were not the varnas
but the jâtis which were lineage descendants and indicated the
dominance of andent familial exclusivism. Such exdusivism was
not specifically Aryan; tribal sodedes are known to have had rigid
rules of exogamy and commensality and fraternity taboos are also
to be found among the Semites.
The pre-eminent status of the brahmana was not secured from
17 It has been suggested that Durkheim understated the degree of inter­
dependence and reaprodty in mechanical solidarity and overstated the role
of repressive law. Lukes, op.cit, p. 159ff.
DURKHEIM AND WEBER 39
the start, but was gradually usurped by the brahmana after an initial
competition for status between the brShmana and the ksatriya.
Bougie argued that since the brahmana caste could not accumulate
riches its essential strength lay in religious power which it ex­
ploited and in this was encouraged by an absence of political
organization. The prestige of the brShmana arose out of many
factors. The radal superiority of the Aryans who conquered the
Dravidians was partly responsible since the brBhmanas salvaged
what they could of their Aryan inheritance by careful marriage
regulations. However, he qualified this by stating that it could not
be based on physical types but on the perception of differences
among ethnic groups. In addition, the brahmanas had become the
guardians of the sacrifice and as such were in a perpetually con­
secrated condition (a view rather similar to Hubert and Mauss)
which was reiterated by an emphasis on avoiding pollution
through food and touch, all of which strengthened the exclusivity
of the brahmana.
Caste therefore resulted from a concurrence of spontaneous
and collective tendencies subject for the most part to the influence
of ancient religious practices. The closed cult of the first familial
groups prevented castes from mingling and the respect for the
mysterious effects of sacrifice finally subordinated them to the
castes of priests. The ideas which generated the caste system
argued Bougll, are not peculiar to the Hindus or to the Aryans,
but were the common patrimony of primitive peoples. They sur­
vived in India because they managed to resist the influence of any
unifying forces cutting across the exclusive groups. Thus, Hindu
civilization is characterized by an arrested social development
Indian society has moved in an inverse direction and has con*
tinued to divide, specialize and hierarchize whereas other so­
cieties have unified, mobilized and levelled. Thus, caste society
had the same roots and origins as egalitarian societies, but unlike
the latter, which underwent changes in the egalitarian direction,
caste society deliberately remained inegalitarian.
The lack of social and historical change is specifically noted
40 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
by Bougll who uses this as a partial explanation as to why there
are neither historians nor historical records in pre-colonial India.
He maintains that superficially political forms have changed and
there have been administrative monarchies and feudal politics,
but beneath this the caste structure has preserved a constant form.
Even religion does not succeed in destroying caste since religious
sects take on the characteristic identities of castes. The only excep­
tion to this was Buddhism and significandy Buddhism did not
survive in India. Its disappearance was not due to Hindu in­
tolerance, since intolerance requires political dogmatism which
was lacking in India. Rather it was the abstracting of the Buddhist
community from social life which prevented it from denting the
caste system and furthermore the monastery was closed to those
in opposition to authority. Philosophies of detachment and inac­
tion are not conducive to change and the theory of transmigration
encourages neither reform nor revolt nor change.
On the question of race Bougie did not totally discard racial
identities in caste although he was unsympathetic to the theories
of Risley and anthropometry arguing that castes are not pure races
and are racially mixed. To correlate caste and race in accordance
with Brahmanical theory (of course assuming that this was in fact
Brahmanical theory) is to superimpose the theory on observed
data. Further, hereditary specialization has not deposited essen­
tially different properties in different castes, as was occasionally
suggested by other commentators on Indian society. Bougll was
of the view that the philosophy of race remains unproven, al­
though castes as strictly enclosed groups may have preserved
primitive repulsions of a racial nature.
In his discussion on law and caste Bougie appears to have
relied heavily on Durkheim's description of mechanical solidarity.
Bougll maintains that rules relating to behaviour are governed by
notions of purity and are therefore largely ritual prescriptions.
Unlike western law which is restitutive, the dharmabdstras of India
in which the laws are coded, are repressive. The legal system did
not seek to cut across caste distinctions and instead supported the
DURKHEIM AND WEBER 41
hierarchy of castes and the stress on inequality by assuming an
ascending scale of punishment. Hindu law was able to preserve
its religious colouring because no political power arose to counter­
balance the power of the priestly caste nor did economic life
change caste. Caste did not obstruct economic production—if
anything it assisted in perfecting the dexterity of the craftsman
based on hereditary specialization and the intensive practice of
skills. But caste did obstruct economic change in that it retained
the primitive clan character of society and mechanical solidarity
could not give way to organic solidarity. In the terminology of
Henry Maine, status repels contract. Since caste is essentially
divisive and separatist, economic groups could not arise which
would cut across caste boundaries and the organization of auth­
ority left little place for the institutions of liberty. There was never
a body of towns large enough and numerous enough for the
production and circulation of wealth and at the same time the
production and circulation of ideas acting as the necessary centres
of co-ordination. Centres of production were associated with poli­
tical capitals and were therefore transitory. Commerce was never
predominant in law, action and style. The city requires a unity
among citizens to safeguard its independence/ but this was inim­
ical to caste. Guilds were rooted in caste since they could not adopt
new members or associate socially among themselves. Thus, there
was an arrested development of economic formations, a gen­
eralization on which Weber was to expand.
Some of Bougies views on India are shared by Weber. His
focus was not on caste however but on the absence of the emer­
gence of capitalism. European capitalism was seen as the water­
shed or the divide separating pre-capitalist from capitalist
societies and the dichotomy was emphasized by many theorists at
the time such as Tonnies, Simmel and Maine.18 Marx saw it as a
stage in historical development, but Weber saw it as a totality, as
a 'civilization'. Central to this totality was the role of rationality in
western capitalism which made it a unique experience in world
18 S. Hughes, Consciousness and Society (New York, 1961).
42 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
history.19 This was not to deny the rationality of other civilizations
but to point to the generally more static role of rationality in these
as compared to its dominant role in western capitalism. Weber
tended to pose rationality and irrationality as biopolarities which
are present in every situation. Rationality permeated the whole of
capitalist culture. It dominated science, law (a written constitution
regulating political activity), music, architecture and above all
economics, where it is evident not only in the more obvious
technological basis of industrialization, but also in the separation
of industrial from household economics and the precise analysis
of cost and profit which lies at the core of capitalist enterprise. All
these in turn tend to impersonalize relationships and conduct (and
perhaps even dehumanize certain segments of society). In addi­
tion to rationality, there was also the historical factor of the simul­
taneous emergence of free labour without any land and the
industrialist who had accumulated capital through the mercantile
activities of the pre-capitalist world.20 This was a major element
in the rise of capitalism which Weber conceded to the Marxist
model. The third factor which Weber stressed was the Protestant
religion which he felt embodied the spirit of capitalism. Weber's
emphasis was on the role of Protestantism in developing capi­
talism rather than on Protestantism reflecting the rise of capi­
talism.21 Weber did not accept the possibility of establishing laws
of social development and thereby predicting social change as had
been proposed explicitly by Marx and suggested implicitly by
Durkheim. He rejected evolutionary theories and maintained that
the best analysis was based on categories and 'ideal-types'. The
social scientist was also not in a position to make a representation
of reality. Methodology was merely a means of understanding—
hence the exaggeration implicit in his 'ideal type' was deliberate
in order to highlight differences and clarify the model.
19 J. Freund, The Sociology of Max Weber (London, 1968), p. 5ff.
20 J. Lewis, Max Weber and Value-Free Sociology (London, 1975), p. 67.
21 R.H. Tawney, Religion and the Ri$e ofCapitatism (I-Urmondsworth, 1961),
pp. 89-142.
DURKHEIM AND WEBER 43
Weber's explanation for the absence of capitalism in India
required a detailed examination of religion in India, the two being
intertwined. But, apart from examining the religions of Asia, he
also argued for certain historical situations in Europe having
provided some base for the growth of capitalism. His attempt to
locate the latter was by discussing the absence of capitalism in
antiquity. It was from this perspective that he viewed the historical
development of the pre-capitalist world, both the agrarian struc­
tures of ancient civilizations and the rise of the medieval city.
Weber's discussion on the absence of capitalism in antiquity
appears to be somewhat anachronistic and arises no doubt from
his refusal to make concessions to alternate forms of historical
evolution. Yet at the same time he does speak of stages in the social
organization of agricultural societies. These he describes as the
walled settlements of household and village, the fortress, the
aristocratic city-state, the authoritarian liturgical state, the hoplite
polis and the democratic citizen polis.22 The initial stage was
characterized by a distinction between free members and slaves
and the emergence from among the former of princely clans, their
justification being based on division of spoils, voluntary gifts and
special allotments of land enhanced by divine legitimacy. The
second stage sees the emergence of the king and greater depend­
ence on rent from land. The aristocratic city-state emphasized the
status of those who owned land and debt slaves (often peasants
who could not pay rents). The feudal nobility of the fortress stage
became the urban community, although Wéber does not explain
the emergence of either. The fifth stage refers to the power of the
state and its imposition of duties on the subject. The hoplite polis,
a derivative of the aristocratic polis, was subject to the domination
of the clan and was characterized by a self-equipped citizen army
dependent on ownership of land. This, in turn, gave way to the
final stage of the democratic citizen polis where land ownership
22 M. Weber, The Agrarian Sociology ofA ncient Civilisations (London, 1976),
p.69ff.
44 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
was closely regulated but at the same time separated from military
service.'fcommunal forms of land ownership were abolished and
rent alone remained. This led to the rise of capitalism since slaves
were not debt slaves but purchased. Sharecroppers and slave
agriculture gave way to yeomanry and mercenary armies replaced
the hoplites. Ultimately city-states declined and were replaced by
monarchical state systems with their major structural unit in the
manor, channelling land relations, taxes and military recruitment.
Weber saw the large empires of Asia such as the Assyrian and the
Persian as conglomerates of urban and manorial areas. Yet at the
same time he accepted the theory of the absence of private owner­
ship of land in Asian civilization. He argues that, whereas in
Europe the pattern of settlement moved from cattle breeding to
agriculture and private ownership of land emerged on the basis
of communal grazing grounds, in Asia it changed from nomadism
to horticulture and the notion of private ownership was thus
by-passed.23-
Weber argues against the possibility of a capitalist economy
emerging in the ancient past because the cities were centres of
consumption rather than production. The urban economy of dties
was limited since they were dependent on grain imports, their
export articles were based on high labour inputs which required
the purchase of slaves and their policies were solely determined
by commercial interests. The development of capitalism was not
based on rent from land but on commodity production. Slave
agriculture could be regarded as capitalist although here Weber
would be subjected to the same criticism as that made of
Rostovtzeffs views on capitalist agriculture in Greco-Roman an­
tiquity.24
23 Ibid., p. 37ff. Horticulture implies a mixture of food-gathering and
primitive food production requiring neither technological innovations nor
substantial changes in demographic structure and land-rights as were neces-
saiy in the transition from cattle breeding to agriculture.
" M. Reinhold, 'Historian of the classic world: a critique of Rostovtzeff/
Science and Society, 1946,10, pp. 361-91.
DURKHEIM AND WEBER 45
In his study The city, with particular emphasis on the medieval
dty, Weber moves away from earlier theorists who had empha­
sized religion, legal structure replacing kinship, contract replacing
status and economic institutions providing the theoretical basis of
the city. Weber argues that it is the evolution of the urban com­
munity as an institution which characterizes the basis of the dty.
Above all that the urban community is typical of Ocddental
sodety and is virtually absent in the Orient (except in the andent
Near East). It is based on the dominance of trade-commerdal
relations and characterized by the presence of fortifications, a
market, a court reflecting partially autonomous law, assodation
of dty members with partial autonomy and administration by
authorities in whose election the burghers partidpate. With refer­
ence to India, Weber argued that only guilds and castes developed
courts and spedal legal structures but even here trial by law and
courts were absent. Autonomous administration was virtually
unknown. The Indian urban dweller remained a member of the
caste, guild or dty-ward, but not a ritizen of the dty. There was
no joint assodation representing the dty and this was prevented
by the segregating necessities of the system. Endogamous castes
with their exclusive taboos were an obstade to the fusion of the
dty dwellers into a status group enjoying social and legal equality
and the ban on commensality among castes prevented the display
of solidarity and fraternity of those sharing a common table. The
only exceptions to this were that in periods of salvation religions,
guilds could sometimes cut across town loyalties if they sub­
scribed to the religion; and in the periods prior to the rise of
bureaucratic kingdoms there were autonomous dties governed by
dan elders. Indian dties were essentially royal centres or political
capitals with market places and fortifications.
Medieval Ocddental dties (and espedally those north of the
Alps) were strikingly different from Asian dties. They grew as a
result of immigration so that local ties were eroded and the city
became an administrative district within which all inhabitants
irrespective of differences shared the same administration. Taboo
46 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
barriers of totem, caste and clan were absent On the contrary, the
amjuratio, the oath-bound fraternity of burghers, broke through
some of the earlier tendencies towards separation. Weber's rather
glowing account of the medieval Occidental city tends to blur the
distinctions within the citizens where both fraternity and aut­
onomy tended to belong to limited groups. For Weber, the most
important aspect of the dty, namely civic development, emerged
neither in the Asian dty nor in the medieval European dty. It
emerged later in the West European dty. He gives among possible
reasons for its absence the lack of dty fraternization which en­
courages the growth of the urban community. Clans and castes
were mutually exdusive. There were no urban military interests
and the burgher was not a military man. The guilds in the dties of
India and China could bring pressure on royal power, but could
not oppose it in a military manner. In the later European dties the
guilds could not only combine and assert dvic power, but the
conjurationes could take up arms independently of the king. It was
this ability to unite as dtizens, demonstrate independence and
defy royal power which made the difference. The legalization of
privileges encouraged political autonomy. In Weberian terms tra­
ditional domination gradually gave way to legal domination. The
occurrence of a charismatic figure was not preduded, but the
potential for a redprocal relationship so necessary to the theory of
domination would be reduced in a sodety built on legal domina­
tion and the bureaucracy.
Charismatic leadership was more apparent in the role of the
prophet in early sodeties.25 Here Weber differentiates between the
exemplary and the ethical prophet. The Buddha typifies the first
where there is no divine mission, the prophet merely showing his
followers the path to salvation. Moses as an ethical prophet high­
lights the claim to communion with God and demands obedience
as an ethical duty. The exemplary prophet is common in India and
25 77« Sociology of Religion (London, 1965), p. 46ff.
DÜRKHEIM AND WEBER 47
China because of the absence of a personal transcendental and
ethical god and also because the rationally regulated world had
its point of origin in the ceremonial order of sacrifice. The dif­
férence between Asia and Europe is spotlighted by another fun­
damental notion, that of predestination. In Europe predestination
strengthened the idea of vocation and gave the Christian a jus­
tification for his activity as being ordained. Success was a sign of
God's blessing. Whereas in Asia it provided a negative impulse
where salvation lay not in vocation but in escape from the suffer­
ings of the terrestrial world. Similarly, there were basic differences
in the nature of asceticism. Christianity culminated in asceticism
of the inner-worldly category not the contemplative withdrawal
of the world-rejecting type in Asia. Man had to ethically justify
himself before the Christian God and not submerge himself. Chris­
tian monasteries placed a premium on labour and work rather
than on meditation and the bureaucracy of the Christian church
required an involvement in life. Some of these contrasts filled out
the dichotomy which Weber was posing between Europe and
Asia, a dichotomy which he analysed at greater length in his
detailed studies of religion in China and India.
It is evident from looking at the sources which Weber con­
sulted in writing The religion of India that he was influenced by the
current theories of nineteenth century Indologists and historians,
relying as he had to on secondary works.36 Weber's analysis of the
social structure of India was a background to his understanding
of both the orthodox doctrines of Hinduism and the heterodox
doctrines of Buddhism together with the influence of popular
religion on these. Caste and religious beliefs were therefore linked
and, ultimately, he was concerned with the impact of religious
beliefs on the secular ethic of Indian society. Weber sees caste as a
status group with rigid rules of intermarriage and social inter­
course and with pollution acting as a discriminatory factor be­
tween castes.
48 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
According to Weber, the spread of caste society was brought
about by three agencies: conquest, the conversion of tribes into
castes, and the sub-division of castes. As a result of conquest racial
differences led to segregation and prevented intermarriages, al­
though Weber did not believe that racial differences were in­
herited. Whereas for Weber race was not the basis of caste as Risley
had argued, the juxtaposition of racial differences were significant
for the development of caste in India. The conquerors claimed
rights in land and the conquered became subservient and lost their
rights. Weber makes much of the difference between what he calls
'guest7 and 'pariah' people without realizing than many 'guest'
peoples were not given the lowest status in caste as he assumes.
The conversion of tribes into castes was a commonly held theory
among the ethnographers of the time. Tribes and castes had a
totally opposite structure and the gradual conversion began with
the assimilation of ruling groups among tribal societies into Hindu
society generally by their being given ksatriya status.27 It was also
said that food-gathering tribes who had lost their land as a result
of the expansion of the agrarian economy were sometimes assimi­
lated en masse as a single caste, usually that of peasants. The
sub-division of castes meant that a new caste could branch off from
an existing one by migration, a change in ritual duties, entry into
a new religious sect, inequality of property possession where the
better-off would imitate high caste social norms or a change of
occupation arising out of economic or technological change. A
difference of caste was established with the denial of connubium
and commensalism by the original caste and the renunciation of
ritual duties by the new caste.
Weber argued that the formation of castes was fundamental
to the Indian social order which is based on clan charisma. Even
feudal state formation did not rest on land grants but derived from
27 E.W. Hopkins, 'The social and militaiy position of the ruling caste in
ancient India as represented in the Sanskrit epics/ Journal of the American
Oriental Society, 1899,13, p. 57ff.
DURKHEIM AND WEBER 49
sib, dan, phratry and tribe. The historical evidence however indi­
cates that it was the making of land grants from the first millen­
nium AD that broke the dan charisma. This evidence was available
to Weber in the translations of epigraphical data but he, like the
historians of the time evidently overlooked this. In the absence of
genuine feudalization he argued that there was a prebendalization
of the patrimonial state.
The bUdraa as craftsmen he described as helots of single vil­
lages receiving a fixed wage or artisans in self-governing villages
selling their products directly or through traders, or artisans set­
tled by the kings, the temple, the landlord and, whether bondsmen
or free, subject to servitude, or, finally, independent artisans set­
tled in well-defined parts of the dty and working as wage earners.
For the vaisyas the caste of traders and merchants, Weber drew his
information from the description given by Baden-Powell, and
maintained that they could not struggle against the patrimonial
prince because of the caste system as well as the pacifism preached
by the salvation religions. The stress on padfism degraded the
status of the peasant and inhibited the traders from creating an
urban militia. Caste had a negative effect on the economy since it
was anti-rational and traditionalistic. Ritual laws stood in the way
of economic and technical revolutions. The trader remained a
merchant incapable of using a new form of labour power and of
diverting his wealth into capitalist forms. Neither was there any
chance of cross-caste assodations leading to the autonomy of the
dty nor was there any fraternization of castes as in European
guilds followed by the seizing of political power. Caste empha­
sized distance rather than association. Cities were fortresses rather
than urban centres with a weak market nucleus.
Enveloping the sodal totality was the theory of sSmsara and
karma (transmigration and rebirth) which developed into a system
for the first time in Buddhist thought. Although Buddhism denied
the existence of the soul and merely postulated the continuity of
consriousness through a cycle of rebirths, it nevertheless related
the ethics of rebirth to caste and this became axiomatic to both
50 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
Hindu and Buddhist social philosophy. Karma transformed the
world into a strictly rational, ethically determined cosmos repre­
senting the most consistent theodicy ever produced in history. But
it also required the strict fulfilment of caste obligation. Ethnic and
economic factors were no doubt significant to caste structure, but
karma reinforced it at the ethical level. There was no universally
valid ethic but a compartmentalization of private and social ethic
with each caste having its own ethic and, therefore, men were
forever unequal. The absence of ethical universalism led to striv­
ing for individual salvation based on attempts to escape the wheel
of rebirth. Even asceticism was a striving for personal, holy status
where gnosis and ecstasy were sublimated to personal salvation
as also were the natural sciences. Rational methods of asceticism
were directed towards irrational goals. Yogic and ascetic techni­
ques had two purposes: they had to accommodate the holy
through the emptying of consciousness and they sought gnostic
knowledge through meditation and techniques conducive to
meditation. The salvation doctrines within which Weber included
Buddhism, Jainism and the BhSgavat-bhakti aspects of Hinduism,
showed scant interest in the ethic for life on a temporal plane. For
them reality consisted of the eternal order of the universe and the
rebirth of souls.
Weber described Buddhism as the polar opposite of Islam and
Confucianism: it was an unpolitical and anti-political status re­
ligion of wandering and intellectually schooled mendicants. It was
a salvation religion—an ethical movement without cult or deity
and centred on the personal salvation of the single individual.
Above all, it advocated that the will to life has to be destroyed in
order to achieve nirvana. Although Buddhism did have a levelling,
democratic character, it nevertheless did not attempt any rational
method in life-conduct. Weber explains the schisms in Buddhism
from the fourth century BC onwards as being due to a lack of strong
roots in society, its marginal demands on the laity and its essen­
tially monastic and itinerant way of life. When the monks became
materialist minded and accepted gifts and proselytized, the re­
DURKHEIM AND WEBER 51
ligion declined. This decline was helped by the antagonism of
secular rulers to Buddhist monasteries and the rising power of the
town guilds. The Brahmanical restoration as Weber saw it con­
tinued to emphasize irrational ends. Ritualistic activities were
strengthened because the brahmanas wished to protect their fees
and prebends. Instead of a drive towards the rational accumula­
tion of capital, Hinduism created irrational accumulation chances
for magicians, mystagogues and the ritually oriented strata. Brah­
manism was supported by rent from land and fees for religious
services which were inheritable and given in perpetuity. This
encouraged a bifurcation of religious and secular authority and
led to the weakening of the latter. In addition, local autonomy was
strengthened as against a centralized system. The absence of a
secular ethic was particularly apparent from an equal absence of
the characteristics of European Protestantism. There was no devo­
tion to a calling in Calvinistic terms with its attendant economic
success nor could a rational transformation of the world be postu­
lated as an act of Divine Will. The other-worldliness of Indian
religion did not diminish an interest in this world, but the aim of
this interest was different. Therefore, even if people were ma­
terialistic by nature, they were influenced by non-materialistic
ideology into channelling their materialism to ineffective ends.
Perhaps the most frequently used word in Weber's analysis of
the religion of India is 'absence'—reflecting a sharp distinction in
his mind between the characteristic features of the Occidental
civilization and their absence in the Asiatic/Oriental. To this
extent he was echoing a common belief among nineteenth-century
European thinkers for whom the dichotomy between Occidental
and Oriental was very real. This was enhanced by the supposed
duality between materialist and spiritualist civilizations, a duality
which was to play an even more dominant role in the ideology of
Asian nationalism in the twentieth century. The stress laid by
Weber on the rationality of developments in Europe came under
attack and such analyses were seen as part of a larger racial
framework in which ideologues other than Weber attached value
52 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
judgements of a priori superiority to the rationality. This was of
course quite apart from the question of whether rationality was
the prime motive in the development of European capitalism, a
question which has been legitimately raised by some of those
examining the place of Weber's thought within the European
ideological tradition.28
Weber's understanding of capitalism has its own limitations.
He fails to distinguish between the two major phases of capi­
talism—merchant capitalism and industrial capitalism. Thus, the
characteristics of the first tend to get extended into the second.
Hence the stress on the Protestant ethic, which undoubtedly was
significant in the crystallization of the first phase but of only
marginal significance to the second phase. What was central to the
second phase was colonialism; both in its early form resulting from
the colonization of Latin America and industrialization in the
second phase dependent on the colonization of Asia and Africa.
The ploughing in of the profits of colonialism into the develop­
ment of European capitalism made a qualitative difference to the
nature of capitalism. This not only accelerated industrialization
but provided to capitalism precisely the kind of momentum which
made it of consequence to world history and more than just a
localized European phenomenon. Had the latter been the case,
sociological theory in nineteenth-century Europe would not have
regarded capitalism as the great divide in the classification of
societies. Up to a point this reflects the inadequacies of the under­
standing of the process of industrialization and capitalism current
in Europe at the time. Weber's ideal-type draws on the second
phase, but he seeks to explain it by reference to the characteristics
of the first phase. The uniqueness of western capitalism became
apparent to him when the consequences of the second phase were
being felt in Europe. The advance of Europe against the arrested
growth of Asia was an established postulate in European thought
in the nineteenth century. It was the nature of colonialism which
28 S. Hughes, op. cit, p. 330ff.
DURKHEIM AND WEBER 53
was seen as the historical manifestation of the advance. The initial
inadequacy of Weber's theory is the absence of any reference to
the role of colonies in the development of capitalism. Even if seen
as a unique civilization, Weber's analysis of capitalism was re­
stricted to its nascent phase and to that extent it was incomplete.
His dismal prognostications for the future as envisaged in bureau­
cratic systems, tended to jump from the nascent to the mature
without adequately examining the intervening phases.
It is doubtless Weber's refusal to concede historical evolution
which led him to inquire into the possibility of capitalist forms in
antiquity, both European and Asian. His historical probings
would have been more apposite had he analysed non-European
history during periods immediately prior to the rise of capitalism
in Europe. This he was probably prevented from doing as he did
not visualize historical change in Asian societies. Weber was clear­
ly influenced by the concept of Oriental Despotism and, although
he does not elaborate on this point, he saw Indian society basically
as a static society. Whereas he does see at least three faces to the
form of Modem Europe in Judaism, Greco-Roman antiquity and
medieval Europe, in the case of India and China, he views them
almost as faceless monoliths. This leads to his underplaying even
though aware of it, the change within religious movements or
social groups as, for example, his repeated references to Buddhist
monks as itinerant mendicants even for periods when some were
well-settled property owners. This weakness also relates to the
discrepancy in the source material which he consulted for Europe
and India. In the former case his generalizations are based on data
recorded by the actual groups under discussion but in the Indian
case he uses the media of Brahmanical texts for virtually all his
major generalizations.
Weber accepts the primacy of religion above all other facets in
Indian society. This is perhaps what prevented him from examin­
ing the more clearly-defined economic aspects at the root of capi­
talism in his study of Indian society. Whereas the availability of
free labour and the existence of accumulated capital is a prior
54 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
requisite for the emergence of capitalism, he nowhere attempts to
assess the availability of these in India. To this extent Weber
subscribed to the current lack of interest in the economic institu­
tions of Indian society. Indian civilization was defined as Hindu
and Buddhist with a sprinkling of Jainism. Yet it was precisely in
the period of what has recently been called incipient capitalism in
India, i.e. the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, that the Is­
lamic ethic, both religious and political was an important factor.
A study of merchant capitalism in India would have involved the
need to look at Islam in India, particularly at communities such as
the Bohras and Khojas of Guajarat and the west coast, of for that
matter even non-Islamic communities such as the Parsis. The
exclusion of Islam stemmed from the nineteenth-century tendency
to identify religions with their areas of origin and therefore Islam
was limited to West Asia. To search for the roots of capitalism in
the religious ethic of India during the first millennium BC and the
first millennium AD is, to say the least, an anachronistic exercise.
Weber's study of India was a by-product of his main thesis
and it would be unfair to be too critical of his theories, particularly
as he was relying on secondary material for data. It is strange,
though, that he should not at any point have questioned the
contextual bias of his sources. One can only assume that his faith
in the rationality of contemporary scholarship was as axiomatic to
him as his faith in the rationality of capitalism. One cannot criticize
him for the limitations of his source material but only for accepting
unquestioningly the current interpretations and for not applying
his own methodology to these sources—an accusation which can
equally well be levelled at Marx in his writings on Asia.
In their analyses of caste both Bougl£ and Weber were basing
themselves on the existing theories without questioning too close­
ly the premises of these. That the argument was often circular did
not seem to matter too much, as for instance, in the Census Reports
where the model of caste often related to the Brahmanical
Dharma&stras. It has however to be remembered that they were
writing over half a century ago with no access to the more recent
DURKHEIM AND WEBER 55
insights into the sodai and economic history of India. Early models
without the advantage of detailed research tended to result in
over-simplification. Thus, in spite of arguing quite correctly that
caste formation often took the form of the conversion of a tribe into
a caste, there was all the same an acceptance in Weber's writing of
the racially distinct character of upper and lower castes.
Caste is seen as divisive and separatist but it can be main­
tained that at another level it is associative and this is expressed
for example in the uniformity of certain cultural patterns over
extensive geographical areas. This aspect is not analysed. The
horizontal perspective played a significant role in the spread of
'Hindu dvilization' at the élite levels, and was crucial to the
extension of caste sodety. It was again the assodative character of
caste which was fundamental to major sodai and economic chan­
ges from the late first millennium AD onwards, particularly in
periods of state formation. It could be argued that the nature
of caste underwent a fundamental historical change during this
period—a change which has not been fully recognized by his­
torians and sodologists.29 So strong was the preconception of the
unchanging character of Indian sodety that generalizations based
on the sources of the Vedic period (1000 BC) were considered
adequate for the pre-colonial period up to the eighteenth century
AD. For example, the status of the brahmana is rightly linked with
his control over the sacrificial ritual in the Vedic period. However,
with the extensive granting of property to the brahmana in live­
stock, in gold and ultimately in land there was a qualitative change
in the status of the brahmana by the end of the first millennium AD
as also in the sacrificial ritual. Far from abstracting a community
from social life, the monasteries (the Buddhist viharas and the
Hindu maths) were also to take on the role of social institutions
with substantial political and economic functions. These institu­
tions became parallel seats of power. Alienation from sodety
would have been one reason for joining the monastery but ac­
29 Romila Thapar, The Past and Prejudice (New Delhi, 1975).
56 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
celerated social and political mobility could as well have been
another. The renouncer rapidly acquired both social status and
charisma and frequently built on it a worldly ambition. The 'this-
worldly' role of the renouncer seems to have been missed by these
sociologists.
From the monastic centres, both Hindu and Buddhist in their
time and later even Islamic, there arose the fod of sectarian and
political orthodoxy as well as heterodoxy and opposition which
led them into varying relationships vis-à-vis political authority.
Such religious centres often doubled for networks of tirade and
were therefore in close contact with merchants and guilds. The
nature of the relationship between guilds and political authority
was earlier believed to be one of subservience from the former
towards the latter, but this view requires re-examination with the
availability of more specific and local source material relating to
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. The jockeying for power
between political authority and merchant interests in India during
this period suggests a more complex relationship than had been
supposed earlier. The crucial question may remain the same as the
one posed by Weber, namely, the inability (real or seeming) of the
merchants to make an open bid for political power. The answers
to such questions lie perhaps less with caste as the crucial variable
and more with the role of the European trading companies in Asia.
It is curious that Weber did not examine the sources for this period
in detail. Had he done so his analysis may have been sharper. But
perhaps this would have required of Weber too great an emphasis
on historical perception.
From the perspective of the limitation of source materials
perhaps the greatest injustice is done to the analysis of Buddhism.
Theravada Buddhist sources composed in Pàli were generally
regarded by Indologists as somehow not as reliable as Brahmani-
cal, Sanskrit sources. The former were assumed to be parti pris but
strangely enough not the latter. Since Buddhism had died out in
India, Buddhist texts were not given the same importance even
though at the time of their composition or soon after. Buddhism
DURKHEIM AND WEBER 57
was as important, if not more so, as Brahmanism. Had Weber
looked more fully at Buddhist sources he would have seen a
different epistomology with an emphasis on the universal ethic
within which the caste structure was adjusted (and not just the
absence of the former and an insistence only on the caste ethic), a
movement in time from a pristine utopia to a well-defined future,
a strong sense of sectarian historiography impinging on political
history of a more secular nature and a monastic life deeply em­
bedded in a society of lay-followers. The three major charac­
teristics as defined by Weber seem doubtful since Buddhism was
often closely associated with political authority, at the level of
popular support it assimilated local cults and far from advocating
a destruction of the will to life it endorsed a programme for
the householder and lay-followers which precluded monasticism.
Many of the sectarian splits within Buddhism arose because of its
having to adjust to changing social mores as it spread across India
and Asia. The decline of Buddhism in India had more to do with
the changing role of the monastery as an institution, together with
competition from other religious sects and a decline in patronage
with the decrease of trade in the middle of the first millennium AD.
Weber makes a distinction between early Buddhism, a re­
ligion of salvation-striving monks and the later phase with the
emergence of what he calls monastic landlordism. The salvation-
striving monks were from the start part of a monastic order and
the monasteries were segments of what might be called parallel
societies. The development of monastic landlordism is seen by
Weber essentially in terms of change within the Buddhist structure
and to a lesser degree as the interplay between Buddhist institu­
tions and the other institutions of society. Monastic landlordism
tends to take on a static form which does not conform to the
historical evidence; nor is the emergence of monastic landlordism
merely the result of extensive support from the laity since the
nature of the institution was such that it made demands both on
political authority and the economy. When, even the forest-dwell­
ing monks, theoretically seeking isolation were willing to accept
58 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
royal patronage and become the nuclei of political centres, the role
of such monasteries takes on various political dimensions.
It is not the intention of this paper to attempt to refute the
interpretations of Bougie and Weber. Both studies have been
seminal to much that is new and meaningful in the sociology and
social history of India. A more serious concern with the validity of
these interpretations would undoubtedly result in still newer
areas of research and analysis. Its intent was to suggest that both
Bougie and Weber in their studies on India were influenced by
the prevailing preconceptions about India, which preconceptions
they surprisingly tended to accept without too much questioning.
One wishes that Weber had applied some of his more innovative
categories of thought to the pre-colonial Indian past as he did to
the European past.
ADDITIONAL BIBUOGRAPHY
Baden-Powell, B.H., The Indian Village Community, New Haven, 1957
(originally published in 1896)
Bendix, R., Max Weber, An Intellectual Portrait, London, 1960.
Dumezil, G., Mythe et Epopee, I and II, Paris, 1968,1971.
Dumont, L., Homo Hierarchicus: The Caste System and Its Implications,
New York, 1972.
Durkheim, E., The Division of Labour in Society, New York, 1964 (reprint
and trans).
-----> Primitive Classification, Chicago, 1963 (reprint and trans).
-----> The Elementary Forms of Religious Life: A Study in Religious Sociol­
ogy, London, 1915 (reprint and trans).
Heesterman, J.C., The Ancient Indian Royal Consecration, The Hague,
1957.
Held, G.J., The Mahabharata: An Ethnological Study, London, 1935.
Hubert H., and M. Mauss, Sacrifice: Its Nature and Function, London,
1964 (reprint and trans).
-----, Melanges d'histoire des Religions, Paris, 1909.
Mill, ].t History of British India, London, 1818-1823.
DURKHEIM AND WEBER 59
M. Muller, Chips from a German Workshop, I and II, London 1867-75.
D. Kantowsky has edited a collection of papers entitled. Recent Re­
search on Max Weber's studies of Hinduism, London 1986, in which
he argues that many scholars working on Weber's theories on
India have misunderstood Weber because the translation of his
study on the religion of India has misrepresented the original
German text. This may well be. One expects therefore a more
correct translation to be made available and in the meantime
studies referring to the original German text
Imagined Religious
Communities ? Ancient
History and the
Modern Search for a
Hindu Identity*
M y choice of subject for this lecture arose from what I think
might have been a matter of some interest to Kingsley
Martin; as also from my own concern that the interplay between
the past and contemporary times requires a continuing dialogue
between historians working on these periods. Such a dialogue is
perhaps more pertinent to post-colonial societies where the colo­
nial experience changed the framework of the comprehension of
the past from what had existed earlier: a disjuncture which is of
more than mere historiographical interest. And where political
ideologies appropriate this comprehension and seek justification
from the pre-colonial past, there, the historian's comment on this
process is called for.
Among the more visible strands in the political ideology of
contemporary India is the growth and acceptance of what are
called communal ideologies. 'Communal', as many in this audi­
ence are aware, in the Indian context has a specific meaning and
primarily perceives Indian society as constituted of a number of
* I would like to thank K.N. Panikkar, N. Bhattadiaiya and B.K. Matilal
for their helpful criticism of an earlier draft of this lecture.
IMAGINED RELIGIOUS COMMUNITIES ? 61
religious communities. Communalism in the Indian sense there­
fore is a consciousness which draws on a supposed religious
identity and uses this as the basis for an ideology. It then demands
political allegiance to a religious community and supports a pro­
gramme of political action designed to further the interests of that
religious community. Such an ideology is of recent origin but uses
history to justify the notion that the community (as defined in
recent history) and therefore the communal identity have existed
since the early past. Because the identity is linked to religion, it can
lead to the redefinition of the particular religion, more so in the
case of one as amorphous as Hinduism.
Such identity tends to iron out diversity and insists on con­
formity, for it is only through a uniform acceptance of the religion
that it can best be used for political ends. The attempt is always to
draw in as many people as possible since numbers enhance the
power of the communal group and are crucial in a mechanical
view of democracy. This political effort requires a domination
over other groups and where the numbers are substantially larger,
there is a deliberate emphasis both on superiority and the notion
of majority, a notion which presupposes the existence of various
'minority communities'. In the construction of what have been
called 'imagined communities',1 in this case identified by religion,
there is an implied rejection of the applicability of other types of
divisions in society, such as status or class.
In the multiplicity of communalisms prevalent in India today,
the major one obviously is Hindu communalism since it involves
the largest numbers and asserts itself as the dominant group. I
shall therefore discuss only the notion of the Hindu community
and not those of other religions. Nevertheless my comments on
communal ideology and its use of history would apply to other
groups claiming a similar ideology. I would like to look at those
constituents of Hindu communal ideology which claim legitimacy
from the past, namely, that there has always been a well-defined
1 B. Anderson, Imagined Communities (Vaso, 1983).
62 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
and historically evolved religion which we now call Hinduism
and an equally dearly defined Hindu community. Implicit in this
are the historical implications of Hindu communalism and I shall
argue that it is in part a modem search for an imagined Hindu
identity from the past, a search which has drawn on the historiog­
raphy of the last two centuries. The historical justification is far
from being the sole reason for the growth of communalism, but
recourse to this justification fosters the communal ideology.
The modem description of Hinduism has been largely that of
a bra/imama-dominated religion which gathered to itself in a some­
what paternalistic pattern a variety of sects drawing on a range of
Buddhists, Jainas, Vaisnavas, ¿aivas and ¿aktas. The texts and the
tradition were viewed as inspirational, initially orally preserved,
with multiple manifestations of deities, priests but no church, a
plurality of doctrines with a seeming absence of controversies and
all this somehow integrated into a single religious fabric. Differen­
ces with the Semitic religions were recognized and were seen as
the absence of a prophet, of a revealed book regarded as sacred,
of a monotheistic God, of ecclesiastical organization, of theological
debates on orthodoxy and heresy and, even more important, the
absence of conversion. But somehow the logic of these differences
was not built into the construction of the history of the religion.
Hinduism was projected largely in terms of its philosophical ideas,
iconology and rituals. It is ironic in some ways that these multiple
religious sects were seldom viewed in their social and historical
context even though this was crucial to their understanding. His­
tories of the 'Hindu' religion have been largely limited to placing
texts and ideas in a chronological perspective with few attempts
at relating these to the social history of the time. Scholarship also
tended to ignore the significance of the popular manifestation of
religion in contrast to the textual, a neglect which was remedied
by some anthropological research, although frequently the textual
imprint is more visible even in such studies.
The picture which emerges of the indigenous view of religion
from historical sources of the early period is rather different. The
IMAGINED RELIGIOUS COMMUNITIES ? 63
prevalent religious groups referred to are two, Brahmanism and
Sramanism with a dear distinction between them. They are or­
ganizationally separate, had different sets of beliefs and rituals
and often disagreed on social norms. That this distinction was
recognized is evident from the edicts of the Maury an king Atoka2
as well as by those who visited India and left accounts of what they
had observed, as, for example, Megasthenes,*3 the Chinese Bud­
dhist pilgrims Fa Hsien and Hsfìan Tsang;4 and Alberimi.5 The
Buddhist visitors write mainly of matters pertaining to Buddhism
and refer to the brahmanas as heretics. Patanjali the grammarian
refers to the hostility between Brahmanism and Sramanism as
innate as is that between the snake and the mongoose.6 Sometimes
the brahmanas and the kramanas are addressed jointly as in Bud­
dhist texts and the Ak>kan edicts. Here they are being projected
as a category distinct from the common people. Such a bunching
together relates to a similarity of concerns suggestive of a common
framework of discourse but does not detract from the fundamental
differences between the two systems. It might in fact be a worth­
while exercise to reconstruct Brahmanism from the references to
it in Sramanic and other non-Brahmanical sources.
A historical view of early Indian religion would endorse this
dichotomy and its continuity even in changed forms. Early Brah­
manism demarcates the twice-bom upper castes from the rest. The
twice-born has to observe the precepts of bruti—the Vedas and of
smrfi—the auxiliary texts to the Vedas and particularly the
Dharmabastras. Dharrna lay in conforming to the separate social
observances and ritual functions of each caste. The actual nature
2 J. Bloch, La Inscriptions d'Asoka (Paris, 1950), pp. 97,99, 111
3 J.W. McCrindle, Ancient India as Described by Megasthenes and Arrian
(London, 1877); Arrian, Indica, XI.I to XII.9; Strabo XV 139-41,46-9.
4 J. Legge, Fa-hien's Record of Buddhistic Kingdoms (Oxford, 1886); S. Beal,
Si-yu-ki:Buddhist Records of the Western World (London, 1884).
EC. Sachau (trans, and ed.), Alberuni's India (Delhi, 1964 reprint), p. 21.
6 S.D. Jos hi, ed., PataAjali VyBkarana MahabhSsya (Poona, 1968), n. 4.9} I.
476.
64 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
of belief in deity was left ambiguou s and theism was not a require­
ment. The focus of worship was the sacrificial ritual. Brahmanism
came closest to having a subcontinental identity largely through
its ritual functions and the use of a common language, Sanskrit,
even though it was prevalent among only a smaller section of
people.
¿ramanism, a term covering a variety of Buddhist, Jaina,
Ajivika and other sects, denied the fundamentals of Brahmanism
such as Vedic kruti and smrti. It was also opposed to the sacrificial
ritual both on account of the beliefs incorporated in the ritual as
well the violence involved in the killing of animals. It was charac­
terized by a doctrine open to all castes and although social hierar­
chy was accepted it did not emphasize separate social observances
but, rather, cut across caste. The idea of conversion was therefore
notionally present. The attitude to social hierarchy in most fera-
manic sects was not one of radical opposition. In Buddhism, for
example, recruitment to the sangha and support from lay followers
was initially in large numbers from the upper castes and the
appeal was frequently also made to such groups.7 Nevertheless
there were no restrictions on a lower caste recruitment and in later
periods support from such groups was substantial. The founders
of the ¿ramanic sects were not incarnations of deity. Buddhism
and Jainism had an ecclesiastical organization, the sangha, and in
most cases there was an overall concern with historicity.
In terms of numbers there appears to have developed even
greater support for the ¿akta sects which were in many ways
antithetical to early Brahmanism. The essentials of ¿aktism are
sometimes traced back to Harappan times and some of these
elements probably went into the making of popular religion from
the earliest historical period. Recognized sects gradually ciystal-
ized from the first millennium AD when they come to be referred
to in the literature of the period. The centrality of worshipping the
goddess was initially new to upper caste religion. Some of these
7 N. Wagle, Society at the Time of the Buddha (Bombay, 1966), p. 74.
IMAGINED RELIGIOUS COMMUNITIES ? 65
sects deliberately broke the essential taboos of Brahmanism relat­
ing to separate caste functions, commensality, rules of food and
drink and sexual taboos.6 That some of the beliefs of the ¿akta sects
were later accepted by some brahmam sects is an indication of a
break with Vedic religion by these brahmam sects although the
legitimacy of the Vedic religion was sometimes sought to be
bestowed on the new sects by them. Such religious compromises
were not unconnected with the brahmanical need to retain social
ascendency. However, some brahmanical sects remained or­
thodox.
As legitimizers of political authority, the brahmanas in the first
millennium ad were given grants of land which enabled them to
become major landowners. The institutions which emerged out of
these grants such as the agraharas became centres of control over
rural resources as well as of Brahmanical learning and practice. It
was probably this high social and economic status of the
brahmana castes which encouraged the modem idea that Brah­
manism and Hinduism were synonymous. But that Brahmanism
had also to compromise with local cults is evident from the re­
ligious articulation of text and temple and from the frequency with
which attempts were introduced into Brahmanism to purify the
religion in terms of going back to kruti and smrti. In the process
of acculturation between brahmanic 'high culture' and the 'low
culture' of local cults, the perspective is generally limited to that
of the Sanskritization of the latter. It might be historically more
accurate on occasion to view it as the reverse, as, for example, in
the cult of Viththala at Pandharpur or that of Jagannatha at Puri.9
a
° Curiously, the eating of meat and the drinking of intoxicants was part
of the rejection of Brahmanism for these were now abhorent to Brahmanism,
a rather different situation from that described in the Vedic texts where
brahmanas consumed beef and took soma.
9 G.D. Sontheimer, 'Some Memorial Monuments of Western India/ in
German Scholars in India, II (New Delhi, 1976); S.G. Tulpule, 'The Origin of
Viththala: A new Interpretation/ ABORI, 1977-78, vols. 58-59, pp. 1009-15;
A. Dandekar, 'PastoraUsm and the Cult of Vifhfhala/ M. Phil. Dissertation,
66 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
In such cases the deities of tribals and low caste groups become,
for reasons other than the purely religious, centrally significant
and Brahmanism has to adapt itself to the concept of such deities.
The domain of such deities evolves out of a span spreading hori­
zontally, moving from a village to its networks of exchange and
finally encompassing a region. The focal centre of such a cult takes
on a political dimension as well in the nature of the control which
it exercises, quite apart from ritual and belief. Pilgrimage then
becomes a link across various circumferences.
The increasing success of Brahmanism by the end of the first
millennium AD resulted in the gradual displacement of
¿ramanism—but not entirely. Local cults associated with new
social groups led to the emergence of the more popular Puranic
religion. Vedic deities were subordinated or ousted. Vi$nu and
iiiva came to be worshipped as the pre-eminent deities. The thrust
of Puranic religion was in its assimilative and accommodating
processes. A multitude of new cults, sects and castes were worked
into the social and religious hierarchy. Religious observance often
coincided with caste identities.
By the early second millennium AD a variety of devotional
cults—referred to by the generic label bhakti—had come to form a
major new religious expression. They drew on the Puranic tradi­
tion of &aivism and Vaisnavism but were also in varying degrees
the inheritors of the feramanic religions. Their emphasis on com­
plete loyalty to the deity has been seen as a parallel to feudal
loyalties. But what was more significant was that bhakti cults and
the sects which grew around them sought to underline depend­
ence on and salvation through the deity. To this extent they
indicate a departure from earlier indigenous religion. These cults
were god-centred rather than man-centred. The ritual of sacrifice
had been substituted by the worship of an icon. Some sects ac­
cepted, up to a point, brahmanical hruti and smrti whereas others
JNU; H. Kulke, Jagtmnatha kult und Gajapati-Kdnigtum (Wiesbaden, 1979),
p. 227; H. Kulke and D. Rothermund, A History of India (London, 1986),
p. 145ff.
IMAGINED RELIGIOUS COMMUNITIES ? 67
0
vehemently denied it, a debate which continues to this day. Those
sects in opposition to Brahmanism which sought to transcend
caste and differentiated social observances, insisting that every
worshipper was equal in the eyes of the deity, often ended up as
castes, thus once again coinciding sect with caste. With the arrival
of Islam in India some drew from the ideas of Islam. Most of these
sects were geographically limited and bound by the barriers of
language. Possibly the beginnings of larger religious communities
within what is now called the Hindu tradition, date to the middle
of the second millennium, such as perhaps some Vaisnava sects,
where, for example, the worship of Krsna at Mathura drew audi­
ences from a larger geographical region than before. This also
heralds a change in the nature of Puranic religion, for Mathura
attracts Vaisnavas from eastern and southern India and becomes
like Ayodhya (for the worship of RSma10) the focus of a search for
sacred topography. It might perhaps be seen as an attempt to go
beyond local caste and sect and build a broader community. The
historical reasons for its happening at this juncture need to be
explored.
Initial opposition from those of high caste status also en­
couraged bhakti sects to inculcate a sense of community with­
in themselves, particularly if they were economically successful,
such as the Viraiaivas. Even when such religious sects attempted
to constitute a larger community, the limitations of location, caste
and language, acted as a deterrent to a single, homogeneous
Hindu community. In the continuing processes of either appro­
priation or rejection of belief and practice, the kaleidoscopic
change in the constitution of religious sects was one which pre­
cluded the emergence of a uniform, monolithic religion.
The multiplicity of cults and sects also reflects a multiplicity
of beliefs. Even in Brahmanism we are told that if two truti tradi­
tions are in conflict then both are to be held as law.11 This is a
10 A. Bakker, Ayodhya (Groningen, 1984).
11 Manu EL 14-15.
68 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
fundamentally different approach from that of religions which
would like to insist on a single interpretation arising out of a given
theological framework. This flexibility together with the emphasis
on social observance rather than theology allowed of a greater
privatization of religion than was possible in most other religions.
Renunciatory tendencies were common, were respected and often
gave sanction to private forms of worship. The renouncer opted
out of society, yet was highly respected.12 The private domain of
belief was always a permissible area of early Indian religion: a
religion which is perhaps better seen as primarily the religious
belief of social segments, sometimes having to agglomerate and
sometimes remaining sharply differentiated. The coexistence of
religious sects should not be mistaken for the absorption of all
sects into an ultimately unified entity. But the demarcation was
often more significant since it related both to differences in re­
ligious belief and practice as well as social status and political
needs. The status of a sect could change as it was hinged to that of
its patrons. Political legitimation through the use of religious
groups was recognized, but the appeal was to a particular sect or
cult or a range of these and not to a monolithic religion. Royal
patronage within the same ruling family, extended to a multipli­
city of sects, was probably conditioned as much by the exigencies
of political and social requirements as by a religious catholicity.
This social dimension as well as the degree to which a religious
sect had its identity in caste or alternatively was inclusive of caste,
has been largely ignored in the modem interpretation of early
Hinduism. With the erosion of social observances and caste iden­
tity, there is now a search for a new identity and here the creation
of a new Hinduism becomes relevant.
The evolution of Hinduism is not a linear progression from a
founder through an organizational system, with sects branching
off. It is rather the mosaic of distinct cults, deities, sects and ideas
12 Romila Thapar, 'Renunciation: The making of a Counter-Culture?/ in
Ancient Indian Social History: Some Interpretations (Delhi, 1978), pp. 63-104.
IMAGINED RELIGIOUS COMMUNITIES ? 69
and the adjusting, juxtaposing or distancing of these to existing
ones, the placement drawing not only on belief and ideas but also
on the socio-economic reality. New deities could be created linked
genealogically to the established ones, as in the recent case of
Santoshi Ma, new rituals worked out and the new sect could
become the legitimizer of a new caste. Religious practice and belief
are often self-sufficient within the boundaries of a caste and are
frequently determined by the needs of a caste. The worship of
icons was unthought of in the Vedic religion, but the idol becomes
a significant feature of Puranic religion and therefore also in the
eyes of contemporary Muslim observers. The consciousness of a
similarity in ritual and belief in different geographical regions was
not always evident Thus bhakti cults were confined to particular
regions and were frequently unaware of their precursors or con­
temporaries elsewhere. Recourse to historicity of founder and
practice was confined within the sect and was not required of a
conglomeration of sects which later came to be called Hinduism.
This is in part reflected in the use of the term sampradSya for a sect
where the emphasis is on transmission of traditional belief and
usage through a line of teachers. The insistence on proving the
historicity of human incarnations of deity, such as R&ma and
Krsna, is a more recent phenomenon and it may be suggested that
there is a subconscious parallel with the prophet and the messiah.
The identification of the janma-bhumis, the location of the exact
place where Krsna and Rama were bom, becomes important only
by the mid-second millennium AD.
Religions such as Buddhism, Jainism, Islam and Christianity,
see themselves as part of the historical process of the unfolding
and interpreting of the single religion and sects are based on
variant interpretations of the original teaching. They build their
strength on a structure of ecclesiastical organization. In contrast to
this, Hindu sects often had a distinct and independent origin.
Assimilation was possible and was sometimes expressed in the
appropriation of existing dvilizational symbols. What needs to be
70 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
investigated is the degree to which such dvilizational symbols
were originally religious in connotation.
Civilizational symbols are manifested in many ways: from the
symbol of the svastika to the symbol of the renouncer as the noblest
and most respected expression of human aspirations. The history
of the svastika goes back to the fourth millennium BC where it
occurs on seals and impressions from northwest India and Central
Asia. In the Indian subcontinent it is not a specifically Hindu
symbol for it is used by a variety of religious groups in various
ways, but in every case it embodies the auspidous. The Bon-po of
the Himalayan borderlands reverse the symbol to distance them­
selves from the Buddhists. The two epics, the Mahabharata and the
Ramayana, frequently treated as primarily the religious literature
of the Vaisnavas, are in origin as epics, dvilizational symbols.
They were, at one level, the carriers of ethical traditions and were
used again by a variety of religious sects to propagate their own
particular ethic, a situation which is evident from the diverse
treatment of the theme of the Ramayana in Valmiki, in the Buddhist
Vessantara and Dasaratha Jatakas and in the Jaina version—the
Paumacaryam of VimalasOri.13 The epic versions were also used for
purposes of political legitimation. The primarily Vai§nava re­
ligious function of the epics develops gradually and comes to
fruition in the second millennium AD with dearly defined sects
worshipping Rama or Krsna coindding with the development of
what has been called the Puranic religion. Subsequent to this were
various tribal adaptations of the Ramayana, and these were less
concerned with the Vaisnava message and more with articulating
their own social fears and aspirations.
Even on the question of beliefs about the after-life, although
the concept of karma and rebirth was commonly referred to, there
were distinct and important groups who believed in a different
concept. The life after death of the hero in the heaven of Indra or
Romila Thapar, 'The RSmSyana: Theme and Variations/ in S.N. Muk-
herjee, ed., India: History end Thought (Calcutta, 1982), pp. 221-53.
IMAGINED RELIGIOUS COMMUNITIES ? 71
feiva, waited upon by apsaras, goes back to the Vedic belief in the
pitrloka or House of the Fathers. This belief is a major motivation
in the widespread hero cults from the mid-first millennium AD
onwards.14 Here even the concept of after-life was conditioned by
social birth and function. A different idea influences the way in
which the ritual of sati changes its meaning over time. Initially a
ritual which ensured that the faithful wife accompanied her hero-
husband to heaven, and therefore associated largely with ksatrtya
castes and those dying heroic deaths, its practice by other castes
in the second millennium AD involved a change in eschatology.
Ultimately the sati was defied, which meant that she neither went
to heaven nor was subjected to the rules of karma.15
It has been suggested that there was a structural similarity in
various rituals practised by people in different regions and there­
fore shared myths and shared ritual patterns can account for some
unity in the varieties of the religious beliefs that we find in India
over a long time.16 This is certainly true. But nevertheless it is
different from a shared creed, catechism, theology and ecclesias­
tical organization.
The definition of Hinduism as it has emerged in recent times
appears not to have emphasized the variant premises of Indian
religion and therefore the difference in essence from the model of
Semitic religions. This definition was the result of various factors:
of Christian missionaries who saw this as the lacunae of religions
in India and which they regarded as primitive; of some Orientalist
scholarship anxious to fit the 'Hindu' process into a comprehen­
sible whole based on a known model; the efforts also of Indian
reform movements attempting to cleanse Indian religion of what
they regarded as negative encrustations and trying to find paral­
lels with the Semitic model. Even in the translation of texts from
14 Romila Thapar, 'Death and the Hero/ in S.C. Humphreys and H. King,
Mortality and Immortality: The Anthropology and Archaeology of Death (London,
1981), pp. 293-316.
15 Romila Thapar, 'Sati in History/ Seminar, no. 342 (Februaiy 1988).
16 Personal Communication from a friend.
72 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
Sanskrit into English, where religious concepts were frequently
used the translation often reflected a Christian undertone. The
selection of texts to be studied had its own purpose. The East India
Company's interest in locating and codifying Hindu law gave a
legal form to what was essentially social observance and cus­
tomary law. The concept of law required that it be defined as a
cohesive ideological code. The Manu Dharmabastra, for example,
which was basically part of Brahmanical smrti was taken as the
laws of the Hindus and presumed to apply universally. In the
process of upward social mobility during the late eighteenth and
early nineteenth centuries, traders and artisanal groups emerged
as patrons of temple building activities and the trend to conform
to the brahmanical model was reinforced by this comprehension
of Hinduism.17 The growth of the political concepts of majority
and minority communities further galvanized the process.
The degree to which castes and sects functioned indepen­
dently even in situations which would elsewhere have been re­
garded as fundamentally of theological importance, can perhaps
be seen in attitudes to religious persecution and the manifestations
of intolerance. Among the normative values which were high­
lighted in the discussion of Hinduism in recent times, has been the
concept of ahimsa or non-violence. It has been argued that non­
violence and tolerance were special features of Hinduism which
particularly demarcated its ethics from those of Islam and to a
lesser extent Christianity. Yet ahimsa as an absolute value is char­
acteristic of certain feramanic sects and less so of Brahmanism. The
notion appears in the Upanisads, but it was the Buddhists and the
Jainas who first made it foundational to their teaching, and their
message was very different from that of the Bhagavad-Gita on this
matter. That Brahmanism and ¿ramanism were recognized as
distinct after the period of the Upanisads further underlines the
significance of ahimsa to ¿ramanic thinking. This is also borne out
by the evidence of religious persecution.
17 H. Sanyal, Social Mobility in Bengal (Calcutta, 1981).
IMAGINED RELIGIOUS COMMUNTITES ? 73
In spite of what historians, ancient and modem, have written,
there is a persistent, popular belief that the 'Hindus' never in­
dulged in religious persecution. However, the feaivite persecution
of feramanic sects is attested to and on occasion, retaliation by the
latter. Hsüan Tsang writing in the seventh century refers to this
when he describes his visit to Kashmir.18 That this was not the
prejudiced view of the Buddhist pilgrim is made dear by the
historian Kalhana in the RajataranginJ, who even in the twelfth
century refers to the earlier destruction of Buddhist monasteries
and the killing of Buddhist monks by the Hüna king Mihlrakula
and other ardent feaivites.19 That Mihlrakula was a Hüna is used
by modem historians to excuse these actions, but it should be
remembered that he gave large grants of land, agrahiras, to the
brahmanas of Gandhára, which Kalhana in disgust informs us
they gratefully received. Clearly there was competition for royal
patronage and the ¿aiva brahmanas triumphed over the Buddhists.
The Buddhist association with the commerce between India and
Central Asia was one of the reasons for the material prosperity of
the Buddhist sañgha?0 The Hüna disruption of the Indian trade
with Central Asia may well have resulted in an antagonism be­
tween the northern Buddhists and the Hünas.
Elsewhere there is a variation on this story. In Tamil Nadu, for
example, from the seventh century onwards, feaiva sects attacked
Jaina establishments and eventually succeeded in driving out the
hramanas?1 In neighbouring Karnataka, at a somewhat later date,
the Vira&aiva or Lin gaya tas acquiring wealth and status in com­
merce, persecuted Jaina monks and destroyed Jaina images.23 In
18 S. Beal* Si-yu-h, I. xdx.
191.307.
20 Xinru Liu, Ancient India and Ancient China (Delhi, 1988).
21 Romila Thapar, Cultural Transaction and Early India (Delhi, 1987),
p. 17ff.
22 P.B. Desai, Jainism in South India (Shotapur, 1957), pp. 23,63,82-3,124,
397-402; Epigraphia Indica V, p. 142ff, 255; Ep. Ind. XXIX, pp. 139-44; Annual
Report of South Indian Epigraphy, 1923, p. 4ff.
74 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
some inscriptions the Vlrakuvas claim that the Jainas began the
trouble. In this case the hostility can be traced not to competition
for royal patronage but rather to control of the commercial econ­
omy over which the Jainas had a substantial hold. A further reason
may also have been linked to the fact that the Jainas, maintaining
high standards of literacy, may have been seen by the Vira&aivas
as rivals in the role of advisers and administrators at the royal
court.
What is significant about this persecution is that it involved
not all the feaivas but particular segments of sects among them. The
persecution was not a jehad or a holy war or a crusade in which all
Hindu sects saw it as their duty to support the attack or to wage
war against the Buddhists or the Jainas. Nor was there room for
an inquisition in the Indian situation, for there dissidents could
found a new sect and take on a splinter caste status. The notion of
heresy evolved gradually. The term pasamda in the Afeokan edicts
refers merely to any-reiigious sect or philosophical school. By the
time of the Puranic literature, pasanda quite clearly referred to sects
in opposition to Brahmanism and carried with it the clear connota­
tion of contempt.23 Untouchability was also a form of religious
persecution, for this exclusion was common to Brahmanism as
well as to some feramanic sects, the candala being a category apart.
Vaisnavism, although it had its episodes of enemity with feaivism
and others, seems to have been less prone to persecuting com­
petitors. Instead it resorted to assimilating other cults and used the
notion of the avatara or incarnation of Visnu to great effect in
doing so. But even Vaisnavism was less given to assimilating the
fcramanic sects, preferring to absorb tribal and folk cults and epic
heroes. Thus in spite of the reference to Buddha as among the ten
incarnations, this, interestingly, does not become the focus of a
large body of myths or Puranic texts as do the other incarnations.
If acts of intolerance and violence against other religious sects
reflecting the consciousness of belonging to a religious community
23 Romila Thapar, 'Renunciation'.
IMAGINED RELIGIOUS COMMUNITIES ? 75
did not form part of a Hindu stand against such sects, then it also
raises the question of how viable is the notion of a Hindu com­
munity for this early period.
The notion of a Hindu community does not have as long an
ancestry as is often presumed. Even in the normative texts of
Brahmanism, the Dharmabastras, it is conceded that there were a
variety of communities, determined by location, occupation and
caste, none of which were necessarily bound together by a com­
mon religious identity. The term for village, grama, referred to the
collective inhabitants of a place and included cultivators and
craftsmen. The control of this community lay in the hands of the
grama-sahgha24 and the mahajana and, in some cases, the pancakula.
Customary law of the village is referred to as grama-dharmaThe
sense of the village as the community was further impressed by
the grants of land to brahmanas and officers in the late first millen­
nium AD when they began to be given administrative and judicial
rights over the villages granted to them. Community therefore had
one of its roots in location and the law of the janapada!territory is
listed among those which a king should observe.
In urban centres, craftsmen of the same profession or of related
professions formed organizations and guilds, such as the puga,
gosthi and brent. They were responsible for production and sale and
gradually took on a community character. Thus donations were
made at Buddhist stupas, as the one at Sanchi, by go$thi$ and
brenis which identified themselves as such.26 These communities
were part of the larger Buddhist community and the same stupa
24 Manu VIIL 41.
25 Akvalayana Grbtsutra I.7.I.; Aivalayana rauta-sutra XII.8; Pinini 6.262;
Amarakoba 2.3.19; Buddhist texts speak more specifically of village boun­
daries (Vinaya Pi\aka I. 109.10; III. 46.200). This was necessary in a system
where the limits of areas for collecting alms had to be defined for each
monastery.
26 See inscriptions from SaTichi as given in J. Marshall and A. Foucher,
Monuments of Sanchi (Calcutta, 1940); also H. LQders, Ep. Ind. X nos. 162-907;
See also the Bhattiprolu inscription, Luders no. 1332.
76 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
was embellished from donations by a number of other such com­
munities and by individuals. One can therefore speak of a Bud­
dhist community which cuts across the boundaries of caste and
locality. In contrast is the silk-weavers guild at Mandasor which
built a temple to Surya, the Sun-god, and rennovated it in the late
fifth century AD.27 Even though the members of this guild had
taken to a variety of alternative professions they retained their
identity as a guild for the purpose of building a temple. This
religious edifice was built through the effort of a single group/
identified as a guild and worshipping Surya, for no other Sun-wor-
shippers were involved nor any other religious group which today
would be called Hindu. It is unlikely that such a group saw itself
as part of a larger Hindu community as its identity seems to have
been deliberately limited. The Hunas established themselves in
the region soon after and were known to be Sun-worshippers. A
temple to the Sun was built at Gwalior in the early sixth century
AD by a high-ranking individual.28 Curiously there is neither
contribution from nor reference to other Sun-worshipping com­
munities in the area in the later inscription, barring the reference
to the Huna kings.
In urban life the guild was a commanding institution acting
as the nucleus of the urban community. The coins and seals of such
guilds point to economic power and social status.29 The Narada-
smrti clearly states that a guild could frame its own laws and these
laws related both to administration and social usage.30 The cus­
tomary law of the guild, the hrcnt-dharma, is particularly men­
tioned in the Dharma&astras and to which kings are required to
conform. The importance of the guild also lies in the fact that some
evolved into jatis or castes, becoming units of endogamous mar­
27 J.F. Fleet, ed., Inscriptions of the Early Gupta Kings and their Successors,
Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, m (Varanasi, 1970 reprint), p. 79ff.
™Ibid., p. 162ff.
29 Brhaspati I. 28-30; Katyayana 2.82; 17.18; 1.126; Archaeological Survey
of India, Annual Report, 1903-04; 1911-12.
30 Narada-smrti, X. 1-2; Ep. Ind. XXX, p. 169.
IMAGINED RELIGIOUS COMMUNITIES ? 77
riage uniting kinship and profession. Those not following a 6ra-
znanic religion maintained their own separate religious identity.
We are also told that the king must respect jati-dharma. The em­
phasis on the dharma of the janapada (locality or territory) brenl
(guild) and jati (caste) and the absence of reference to the dharma
of various religious sects or of a conglomeration of religious sects
are a pointer perhaps to what actually constituted the sense of
community in the early past.
Identities were, in contrast to the modem nation state, seg­
mented identities. The notion of community was not absent but
there were multiple communities identified by locality, languages,
caste, occupation and sect. What appears to have been absent was
the notion of a uniform, religious community readily identified as
Hindu. The first occurrence of the term 'Hindu' is as a geographi­
cal nomenclature and this has its own significance. This is not a
quibble since it involves the question of the historical concept of
'Hindu'. Inscriptions of the Achaemenid empire refer to the fron­
tier region of the Indus or Sindhu as Hi(n)dush.31 Its more com­
mon occurrence many centuries later is in Arabic texts where the
term is initially used neither for a religion nor for a culture. It refers
to the inhabitants of the Indian subcontinet, the land across the
Sindhu or Indus river. Al-Hind was therefore a geographical
identity and the Hindus were all the people who lived on this land.
Hindu thus essentially came to mean 'the other' in the eyes of the
new arrivals. It was only gradually and over time that it was used
not only for those who were inhabitants of India but also for those
who professed a religion other than Islam or Christianity. In this
sense Hindu included both the brahmanas and the lower castes, an
inclusion which was contrary to the precepts of Brahmanism. This
all-inclusive term was doubtless a new and bewildering feature
for the multiple sects and castes who generally saw themselves as
separate entities.
The people of India curiously do not seem to have perceived
31 The Persepolis and Naqsh-i-Rustam inscriptions of Darius, in D.C.
Sircar, Select Inscriptions, vol. I (Calcutta, 1965), p. 7.
78 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
the new arrivals as a unified body of Muslims. The name 'Muslim'
does not occur in the records of early contacts. The term used was
either ethnic, Turuska, referring to the Turks,32 or geographical,
Yavana,33 or cultural, mleccha. Yavana, a back formation from yona
had been used since the first millennium BC for Greeks and others
coming from West Asia. Mleccha meaning impure, goes back to the
Vedic texts and referred to non-Sanskrit speaking people often
outside the caste hierarchy or regarded as foreign and was ex*
tended to include low castes and tribals. Foreigners, even of high
ranks, were regarded as mleccha34 A late fifteenth-century inscrip
tion from Mewar refers to the Sultan of Malwa and his armies as
éakas, a term used many centuries before for the Scythians, and
therefore reflecting a curious undertow of historical memory.35
These varying terms, each seeped in historical meaning, do not
suggest a monolithic view, but rather a diversity of perceptions
which need to be enquired into more fully.
For the early Muslim migrants Indian society was also a
puzzle, for it was the first where large numbers did not convert to
Islam. There was, further, the unique situation that they were
faced with a society which had no place for the concept of conver­
sion, for one's birth into a caste defines one's religious identity and
conversion is outside the explanation of belief.
Historians have posited two monolithic religions, Hinduism
32 Similarly Muslim women were often referred to as turuski, as, for
example, in HemSdri, Caturvarga-cintamani, Prtyaidtta-kSnda.
33 e.g. Chateivara temple inscriptions, where in the thirteenth century a
reference is made to a campaign against the yavtmas. Ep. Ind. 1952, XXIX,
pp. 121-1
34 Romila Thapar, 'The Image of the Barbarian in Early India/ in Ancient
Indian Social History, pp. 152-92. A fourteenth-century inscription from Delhi
refers to Shahab-ud-din, as a mleccha, who was the first Tuniska to rule
Dhillika/Delhi. D.R. Bhandarkar, ed., Appendix to Epi. Ind. XIX-XXÜI,
no. 683.
35 Udaipur inscription of the time of Rajamalla in Bhavnagar Inscriptions,
p. 117ff. And see Bhandarkar, ed.. Appendix to Ep. Ind. XlX-XXm, no. 862.
It is ironic that it was earlier thought that these Rajput ruling families may
in some cases have had their origin in the feakasl
IMAGINED RELIGIOUS COMMUNITIES ? 79
and Islam, coming face to face in the second millennium AD. This
projection requires re-examination since it appears to be based on
a somewhat simplistic reading of the court chronicles of the Sul­
tans. These spoke of Hindus sometimes in the sense of the in­
digenous population, sometimes as a geographical entity and
sometimes as followers of a non-Islamic religion. Such references
should be read in their specific meaning and not as referring
uniformly to the religion of India. Possibly the germ of the idea of
a Hindu community begins when people start referring to them­
selves as Hindus, perhaps initially as a concession to being re­
garded as 'the other'. Such usage in non-Islamic sources is known
from the fifteenth century. The literature of the bhakti sects reg­
isters a variation on this. Much that was composed in an in­
digenous tradition such as the Ramacaritamaruts of Tulsidas seems
not to use the term Hindu. That which was clearly influenced by
Islamic ideas such as the verses of Kabir refers to Hindus and
counterposes Hindus and Turu§kas in a religious sense. Curiously
both Tulsidas and Kabir belonged to the Rfimanandin sect, yet
expressed themselves in very different idioms.
Rana Kumbha of Mewar ruling in the fifteenth century, on
defeating the sultans of Dhilli and GurjarStra, takes the title of
himdu suratranaj36 suratrSna, being the Sanskrit for sultan. In the
context of the inscription in which it occurs, it is less a declaration
of religious identity and more a claim to being a sultan of al-hind,
superior to the other sultans. In another inscription the sultan of
Gujarat is referred to as the gurjare&vara and the gurjaradhisvara, but
the virtually hereditary enemy, the sultan of Malwa, merely as
surtdrana,37 a subtle but significant distinction.
It would also be worthwhile to investigate when the term
Muslim came to be used in what would now be called Hindu
sources. One's suspicion is that Turu$ka and its variants and
36 Sadadi Jaina inscription of the time of Kumbhakarna of Medapata in
Bhaxmagar Inscriptions, p. 114ff and D.R. Bhandarkar, op. cit., no. 784; D.
Sharma, tectum on Rajput History and Culture (Delhi 1970), p. 55.
37 Kirtistambha-pia&asti, ASIR, XXIII, p. lllff.
80 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
certainly mleccha were more commonly used as they are to this day.
Mleccha does not have a primary religious connotation. It is a
signal of social and cultural difference. Indian Muslims of course
did not discontinue caste affiliations, particularly as the basis of
marriage relations and often even occupations. Thus the gulf
between the high caste Muslims claiming foreign descent, such as
the ashrafs, and the rest was not altogether dissimilar to the social
difference between brahmanas and non-brahmanas. But the rank
and file were often converted from lower castes, where an entire
jati would convert. These Muslims retained their local language in
preference to Persian, were recognized by minor differences of
dress and manner and often incorporated their earlier rituals and
mythology into Islamic tradition. Some of the mangal-kabyas in
Bengali, for instance, are an example of such interlinks in the
creation of what might be seen as a new mythology where Puranic
deities intermingled with the personalities of the Quran.38 This
becomes even more evident in the folk literature of regions with a
large Muslim population. Elsewhere in Tamil-Nadu, for instance,
the guardian figures in the cult of Draupadi are Muslim.39 This is
not an anomaly if it is seen in terms of local caste relations.
This is not to suggest that the relationship was one of peaceful
coexistence or total cultural integration but rather that the percep­
tion which groups subscribing to Hindu and Islamic symbols had
of each other was not in terms of a monolithic religion, but more
in terms of distinct and disparate castes and sects along a social
continuum. Even the recognition of a religious identity does not
automatically establish a religious community. Tensions, confron­
tations and even persecutions at the level of political authority
were not necessarily repeated all the way down the social scale nor
were all caste and sectarian conflicts reflected at the upper levels.
Gashes which on the face of it would now be interpreted as
between Hindus and Muslims, would require a deeper investiga­
38 Ashim Roy, The Islamic Syncretistk Tradition in Bengal (Princeton, 1983).
39 A. Heltebeitel, The Cult of Draupadi (Chicago, 1988).
IMAGINED RELIGIOUS COMMUNITIES ? 81
tion to ascertain how far they were dashes between specific castes
and sects and to what degree did they involve support and sym­
pathy from other castes and sects identifying with the same re­
ligion or seeking such identity.
The nineteenth-century definition of the Hindu community
sought its justification in early history using Mill's periodization
which assumes the existence of Hindu and Muslim communities
and takes the history of the former back to the centuries BC. Its
roots were provided by yet another nineteenth-century obsession,
that of the theory of Aryan race.40 It was argued that the Indo-
Aryans who conquered India created the Hindu religion and
avilization. In the theory of Aryan race the nineteenth-century
concern with European origins was transferred to India. The the­
ory as applied to India emphasized the arrival of a superior,
conquering race of Aryans who used the mechanism of caste to
segregate groups radally.41 It underlined upper caste superiority
by arguing that they were the descendants of the Aryans and it
therefore became an acceptable explanation of the origin of upper
castes, who could now also claim relationship to the European
Aryans.42 The lower castes were seen as the non-Aryan, indigen­
ous people and were said to be of Dravidian and A us trie origin.
Aryanism was seen then to define the true and pure Hindu com­
munity. Other groups recruited into the caste structure at lower
levels were regarded as polluting the pristine Hindu community.
Because of its centrality to both the notion of community and
religion, the theory of Aryan race requires to be looked at critically
by historians working on nineteenth-century ideas as well as
historians of andent India. The earlier evidence quoted in support
of the theory as applied to India begins to fade with information
40 Romila Thapar, 'Ideology and the Interpretation of Early Indian His­
tory/ of this volume, p. Iff.
41 H. Risley, The People of India (London, 1908).
42 As, for example, in the writings of Keshab Chunder Sen, 'Philosophy
and Madness in Religion/ in Keshab Chundrr Sen*» Lectures in India (London,
1901).
82 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
from archaeology and linguistics. The notion of an Aryan race has
now been generally discarded in scholarship and what we are left
with is essentially a linguistic category: the Indo-Aryan speaking
people. The archaeological picture takes the foundation of Indian
civilization back to proto-history and the Harappa culture. The
characteristic features of the latter do not mesh with those of
the Vedic texts associated with the culture of the Indo-Aryan
speakers.43 The culture depicted in the Vedic texts seems increas­
ingly to have drawn on local practices and beliefs, some going back
to the Harappa culture or earlier, others drawing perhaps from the
then contemporary society in India. There is virtually no evidence
of the invasion and conquest of northwestern India by a dominant
culture coming from across the border. Most sites register a grad­
ual change of archaeological cultures. Where there is evidence of
destruction and burning it could as easily have been a local activity
and is not indicative of a large-scale invasion. The border lands of
the northwest were in communication with Iran and Central Asia
even before the Harappa culture with evidence of the passage of
goods and ideas across the region.44 This situation continued into
later times and if seen in this light then the intermittent arrival of
groups of Indo-European speakers in the northwest, perhaps as
pastoralists or farmers or itinerant traders, would pose little prob­
lem. It is equally plausible that in some cases local languages
became Indo-Europeanized through contact. Such situations
would require a different kind of investigation. If cultural ele­
ments from elsewhere are being assessed, then during the Harap-
pan period excavated evidence for contact with West Asia via the
Gulf was more significant than that with eastern Iran and Central
Asia and this raises another set of possibilities.
43 Romila Thapar, 'The Study of Society in India/ in Ancient Indian Social
History, pp. 211-39; also, 'The Archaeological Background to the Agnicayana
Ritual/ in F. Staal, Agni, vol. II (Berkeley, 1983), pp. 3-40.
44 J. Jarrige, 'Excavations at Mehrgarh: their Significance for Under*
standing the Background of the Harappan Civilisation/ in G. Possehl, ed.,
Harappan Civilisation (New Delhi, 1982), p. 79ff.
IMAGINED RELIGIOUS COMMUNITIES ? 83
The more basic question for the historian is to explain the slow
and gradual spread of the Indo-Aryan language across a large part
of the Indian subcontinet. Here again the evidence from linguistics
provides an interesting pointer. The claim that the earliest of the
Vedic texts, the Rg Veda dating back to the second millennium BC
is linguistically purely Indo-Aryan is now under question for it is
being argued that the text already registers the presence of non-
Aryan speakers. The later Vedic texts show an even greater admix­
ture of non-Aryan and specifically when dealing with certain areas
of activity, such as agriculture.45 The emergent picture might
suggest that the speakers of Indo-Aryan may have been in a
symbiotic relationship with speakers of non-Aryan languages,
with a mutual adopting of not only vocabulary and linguistic
structures in a bi-lingual situation but also technologies and re­
ligious practices and beliefs.46 The exclusivity of brahmana ritual
does not have to be explained on the basis of a racial segregation,
but can be viewed as derived from the will to retain a certain kind
of priestly power, which, claiming bestowal by the deities would
ensure a separate and special status. Possibly the political hold of
priestly power has its roots in the Harappa culture. In charting the
spread of Indo-Aryan it is worth remembering that Sanskrit not
only underwent change in relation to other languages with which
it had to co-exist and in relation to social change but that its use
was initially restricted to brahmana ritual and elite groups.
The focus therefore is shifting to an investigation of the many
ways in which a language gains acceptability. This would involve
detailed studies of the juxtaposition of new technologies par­
ticularly in relation to ecological contexts, of demography, of
kinship systems and the ways in which social groups interact
where stratification relates to lineage rather than to race. So deep
has been the modem obsession with race that Pargiter as late as in
the 1920s suggested the identification of even the traditional de-
45 T. Burrow, The Sanskrit Language (London, 1965), p. 379; M.M. Desh-
pande and P.E. Hook« eds., Aryan and non-Aryan in India (Michigan, 1979).
46 Romila Thapar, From Lineage to State (New Delhi, 1984), p. 21ff.
84 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
scent groups from the genealogies of the Puranic texts as Aryan/
Dravidian and Austric.47 Thus the spread of the Indo-Aryan lan­
guages and the changes they manifest are a far more complicated
study than that implied in the theory of spread by conquest. There
is also a need to see the evolving of early Indian society as sug­
gested by archaeological evidence independent of the attempt to
impose Aryan identities on archaeological cultures. Only then can
we hope to understand the social processes which went into the
creation of early Indian society. In the text the term arya generally
refers to status indicating one who is to be respected. Whereas the
connotation of dasa may be said to contain racial elements, as for
example, in the emphasis on physical characteristics, such ele­
ments are not in the forefront of references to arya. Thus in the
Vedic texts there are aryas of dasa descent, the dasi-putrah brah-
mams,48 or, politically powerful dasa chiefs making gifts to the
brahmanas 49 (It is interesting that one of the most respected line­
ages, that of the Purus is associated with sub-standard Sanskrit.50
It is also said that Puru was an ancient king who was an Asura
Raksasa and was overthrown by Bharata,51 which can hardly be
said to place the Purus in the category of the pure Aryans! In the
Dharmahastras it is the observance of the complex vamc&rama-dhar-
ma which defines the arya. To trace the emergence of caste would
also involve a study of access to resources, kinship and clan
networks and notions of pollution.
Early history suggests the existence of multiple communities
based on various identities. The need to create the idea of a single,
Hindu community appears to have been a concern of more recent
times which was sought to be justified by recourse to a particular
47 F.E. Pargiter, Ancient Indian Historical Tradition (London, 1922).
48 BrhaddevatS 4.11-15; 21-3; describes the birth of Dirghatamas and his
son KakMvant as the son of a dasi. The Aitareya Brahmana 2.19 and the
Kau£taki Brahmana 12.3 describe the Rg Vedic seer Kavasa Ailusa as a
dSsi-putrah.
49 Romila Thapar, From-Lineage to State, p. 43.
50 Rg Veda. VII. 18.13.
51 katapatha BrShmana VI. 8.1.14.
IMAGINED RELIGIOUS COMMUNITIES ? 85
construction of history. The new Hinduism which is now sought
to be projected as the religion of this community is in many ways
a departure from the earlier religious sects. It seeks historicity for
the incarnations of its deities, encourages the idea of a centrally
sacred book, claims monotheism as significant to the worship of
deity, acknowledges the authority of the ecclesiastical organiza­
tion of certain sects as prevailing over all and has supported
large-scale missionary work and conversion. These changes allow
it to transcend caste identities and reach out to larger numbers.
Religions indigenous to India which questioned brahmanical be­
lief and practice such as Buddhism and Jainism have been in­
ducted into Hinduism and their separateness is either denied or
ignored. Pre-Islamic India is therefore presented as a civilization
characterized by an inclusive Hinduism, whereas it would seem
that the reality perhaps lay in looking at it as a cluster of distinctive
sects and cults, observing common dvilizational symbols but with
belief and ritual ranging from atheism to animism and a variety of
religious organizations identifying themselves by location, lan­
guage and caste. Even the sense of religious identity seems to have
related more closely to sect than to a dominant Hindu community.
The modem construction of Hinduism is often acclaimed as
in the following defence of Orientalism: 'The work of integrating
a vast collection of myths, beliefs, rituals and laws into a coherent
religion and of shaping an amorphous heritage into a rational faith
known now as "Hinduism" were endeavours initiated by Orien­
talists/52 Given that religious traditions are constantly reformu­
lated, the particular construction of Hinduism in the last two
centuries has an obvious historical causation. Deriving largely
from the Orientalist construction of Hinduism, emergent national
consciousness appropriated this definition of Hinduism as well as
what it regarded as the heritage of Hindu culture. Hindu identity
was defined by those who were part of this national consciousness
52 D. Knopf, 'Hermeneutics versus History/ Journal of Asian Studies, 1980,
39.3, pp. 495-505.
86 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
and drew on their own idealized image of themselves resulting in
an upper-caste, brahmana-dominated identity. Even the counter-
posing of Hindu to other religious identities as an essential fact of
social and historical reality grew out of this construction. But this
construction not only deviates from the history of the religious
groups involved but fails to encapsulate the essential differences
within what is called the Hindu tradition whose presuppositions
were distinct from other religions and closely entwined with social
articulation. The search for coherence and rational faith was in
terms of a perspective familiar to those who came from a Christian
religious tradition and hardly reflected any attempt to understand
the coherence of a different, indigenous religious tradition. The
shape thus given to the latter has changed what originally existed
and has made it difficult to recognize the actual earlier form.
The need for postulating a Hindu community became a re­
quirement for political mobilization in the nineteenth century
when representation by religious community became a key to
power and where such representation gave access to economic
resources. The competition for middle class employment brought
with it the argument that in all fairness the size of the community
should be taken into consideration. Communal representation of
the religious kind firmed up the image. Once this argument was
conceded it became necessary to recruit as many people as pos­
sible into the community. Here the vagueness of what constitutes
a Hindu was to the advantage of those propagating a Hindu
community. It encouraged an almost new perception of the social
and political uses of religion. Conversion to Hinduism was in­
vented largely to bring in the untouchables and the tribals. The
notion of purification, buddhi, permitted those who had been con­
verted to Islam and Christianity to be reintroduced to the Hindu
fold. A Hindu community with a common identity would be
politically powerful. Since it was easy to recognize other com­
munities on the basis of religion, such as Muslims and Christians,
an effort was made to consolidate a parallel Hindu community.
This involved a change from the earlier segmented identities to
IMAGINED RELIGIOUS COMMUNITIES 7 87
one which encompassed caste and region and identified itself by
religion which had to be refashioned so as to provide the ideology
which would bind the group. In Gramsd's terms, the class which
wishes to become hegemonic has to nationalize itself and the new
'nationalist7 Hinduism comes from the middle class.
The change implicit in the various levels of what is called
modernization inevitably results in the refashioning of commu­
nities. Given that the notion of expansive communities may well
be imagined, nevertheless the premises on which such commu­
nities are constructed are open to analysis and where they claim
an historical basis, there the historian has perforce to be involved.
This involvement becomes even more necessary when the concept
of communities is brought into play in assigning positions to them
in history either close to or distant from what are regarded as
national aspirations. Thus the majority community tends to define
national aspirations. The minority communities in varying de­
grees are viewed as disrupting society by their refusal to conform.
The projection of such communities historically is that of their
always having been alien to the dominant culture and therefore
refusing to assimilate with the majority.
Minority communities pick up their cue in a similar recon­
struction of history seeking to project a unified community stance
in all historical situations. The fear of being overwhelmed by the
majority community is expressed even in opposition to the making
of homogeneous civil laws. These are treated as threats to a specific
culture and practice, and there is a tendency to preserve even that
which is archaic in an effort to assert a separate identity.
If the history of religions in India is seen as the articulation not
only of ideas and rituals but also the perceptions and motivations
of social groups, the perspectives which would follow might be
different from those with which we are familiar. The discourse and
the play between and among religious sects of various kinds, has
been a central fact of Indian religion and would reflect a more
realistic portrayal of the role of religion in society. A historically
analytical enquiry into the definition and role of religion and the
88 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
concept of religious communities in pre-modem India could be
juxtaposed with the way in which these have been perceived by
interpreters of the past in the last couple of centuries. Incidentally
such an assessment would be valuable not only to contemporary
society in India but also to those societies which now host the vast
Indian diaspora. Communal ideologies may be rooted in the
homeland but also find sustenance in the diaspora.
It is possible now to look more analytically at the perspectives
on early Indian society as available in the sources, keeping in mind
the insights which we have, arising from research which, in a
sense, is being gradually liberated from the polemics of the colo­
nial age. Where institutions and ideologies of modem times seek
legitimacy from the early past, at least there, the dialogue between
historians working on these time periods becomes imperative.
The Contribution of
D.D. Kosambi to
Indology
It has recently been argued that a revolution in scientific knowl­
edge comes about not through the accumulation of data alone
but through a change in the paradigm.1 When the framework of
explanation or the hypothesis is altered or a new set of questions
are posed only then can there be a breakthrough in scientific
knowledge. This applies as much to history and the social sciences.
The accumulation of data is of course a necessary first step and
includes the deriving of fresh data from new sources, but an
advance in knowledge is dependent on using the data to present
new formulations.
Histories of the Indian sub-continent, such as were to become
germane to the perception on the Indian past, have subscribed to
three major changes of paradigm. The first comprehensive history
was James Mill's History of British India* published in the early
nineteenth century, where he set out his theory of Indian history
evolving out of three civilizations, the Hindu, the Muslim and the
British. The first two of these he described as backward, stagnant
and ahistoric. His theory was to become axiomatic to the peri­
odization of Indian history and is with us still, though sometimes
in a disguised form. A change came about with Vincent Smith's
1 T. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (Chicago, 1970).
2 J. Mill, History of British India (London, 1918).
90 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
History oflndiii3 published in 1919, which tried to avoid the sharp­
ness of Mill's value judgements. Smith concentrated more on a
chronological overview which was in any case less charged with
colonial and anti-colonial sentiment and argued for the rise and
fall of dynasties as being crucial to the study of Indian history. By
the early twentieth century chronological data had accumulated
to the point where such a treatment of history was possible. Where
Mill's assessment was seeking to justify the British conquest of
India, Smith was justifying colonial rule. The infrequency of ex­
plicitly negative value judgements on the pre-British period was
largely an indication of his awareness of Indian national sentiment
in the matter. Nationalist historians writing on early India re­
versed the value judgements but adhered to the paradigm of
dynastic and chronological concerns.
Kosambi's first book. An Introduction to the Study of Indian
History4 published in 1956, was a major shift in the paradigm. He
had little use for a chronological narrative since he argued that
chronology for the early period was too obscure tobe meaningful.
For him histoiy was the presentation in chronological order of
successive developments in the means and relations of produc­
tion.5 Because of the absence of reliable historical records he
argued that Indian history would have to use the comparative
method.6 This meant a familiarity with a wide range of historical
work and his own familiarity with classical European history is
evident in his writing; it also meant the use of various disciplines
and interdisciplinary techniques to enable the historian to under­
stand the pattern of social formations. His definition of the com­
parative method required the historian to be an inter-disciplinary
creature in himself with the ability to use a large number of
3 V. Smith, The Oxford History of India (Oxford, 1919).
4 D.D. Kosambi, An Introduction to the Study of Indian History (Bombay,
1956). Henceforth ISIH.
5 Ibid., p. Iff.
6 Ibid., p. Sff; 'Combined Methods in Indology* Indo-lranian Journal, 1963,
VI, pp. 177-202.
THE CONTRIBUTION OF D.D. KOSAMBI TO INDOLOCY 91
investigative techniques. This ability he demonstrated to the full
in his writings on Indology. Added to this was his conviction that
the historian in India was in a particularly happy position since so
much of the past survives in the present. As he puts it,'. . . the
country has one tremendous advantage that was not utilised till
recently by the historians: the survival within different social
layers of many forms that allow the reconstruction of totally
diverse earlier stages/7 For him, this amply made up for the
absence of reliable historical records.
Kosambi's acknowledged status as an Indologist was all the
more remarkable, in that by profession he was a mathematician.
Indology to begin with was a subsidiary interest, perhaps in­
herited from his father, a scholar of Pali and Buddhism who taught
at various centres in India, apart from a period at Harvard. The
older Kosambi walked the countryside in an effort to relate the
texts to their original milieu an approach which was followed by
his son. A quick perusal of the younger Kosambi's many publica­
tions, points to a telling trend. His earliest papers in the 1930's are
mainly on various aspects of mathematics. In the 1940's his interest
in Indology become apparent in the form of occasional papers.
(This was also the period when he wrote on Soviet contributions
to mathematics and genetics and was enthusiastic about the Soviet
attempt to build a socialist society). He was appointed to the
Mathematics Chair at the T.I.F.R. in 1946. During the 1950's how­
ever and until his death in 1966, most of his publications were on
Indology and early Indian history although his mathematical
interests remained constant.
As an Indologist Kosambi worked on virtually every aspect of
Indological studies. His first venture into early Indian sources was
a critical assessment of Bhartrhari which can be regarded as a
model for such analysis.8 At a later stage he edited, jointly with
7 D.D. Kosambi, The Culture and Cmtiisation of Ancient India in Historical
Outline (London, 1965). Henceforth CCAIHO.
8 'Some Extant Versions of Bhartrhari's Satakasf JBBRAS, 1945, XXI,
pp. 17—32» The {¡atakatmyam of Bhartrhari with the commentary ofR&marsi, ed..
92 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
V.V. Gokhale, the Vidyakara Subhakita-ratna-ko$a for the Harvard
Oriental Series.9 Apart from applying the norms of higher criti­
cism to such texts he also tried to place them in historical context
not merely through a chronological analysis but by referring them
to the society from which they emanated. He argued that from the
first millennium AD Sanskrit should be seen as a measure and
expression of upper class unity when it replaced Prakrit in the
royal courts and was patronized, particularly in the initial stages,
by foreign rulers. This is of course evident in the change from
Prakrit to Sanskrit as the language of royal inscriptions between
the Mauryan and the Gupta periods. He stressed the feudal back­
ground of many Sanskrit texts which brought him into a lively
controversy with one of his closest friends, the Harvard
Sanskritist, Daniel Ingalls. Kosambi maintained that Sanskrit was
deliberately kept restricted to a small number of people, even
though the excellent early grammar of the language by PSnini,
commented upon by Patanjali, converted it into an orderly and
systematic language, open to anyone who was taught it properly.
However he felt that it froze in the hands of what he called, 'a
disdainful priest class',10 and much of the real world was bye-
passed in the courtly literature.
The relation of text to context was examined at greater length
in his papers on the Bhagavad Gita where he attempted to relate
ideology to society.11 He argued that the Gita in propounding the
concept of bhakti laid emphasis on unquestioning faith in, and
personal loyalty and devotion to, a deity, and these values were
in collaboration with Pt. K.V. Krishnamoorthi Sharma, AnandSsrama
Sanskrit Series No. 127 (Poona, 1947); The Southern Archetype of Epigrams
ascribed to Bhartxhari, Bharatiya Vidya Series, 9 (Bombay, 1946); 'The Quality
of Renunciation in Bhartrhari's Poetry/ in Exasperating Essays (Poona, 1857),
p. 72ff.
9 Harvard Oriental Series No. 44 (Cambridge Mass., 1956).
10ISIH, p. 266.
11 'The AvatSra Syncretism and possible sources of the Bhagavad GTt3'
JBBRAS, 1948-9, XXTV-XXV, pp. 121-34; 'Social and Economic Aspects of
the Bhagavad GftS' in Myth and Reality (Bombay, 1962), p. 12ff.
THE CONTRIBUTION OF DD. KOSAMBI TO INDOLOCY 93
in conformity with the ideology of feudalism which also required
a chain of unquestioning loyalties. The text emphasized caste
functions and the requirement to do one's ordained duty as a
member of a particular caste which he saw as a message in support
of caste society and the conservatism which such a society entails;
a message propounded by the upper castes to keep the rest of
society passive. He further suggests that religious sects supporting
a synthesis of gods and of tolerance are expressions of a period
of a social surplus, when wealth was more widely distributed;
whereas the ideology of bhakti is more frequent in periods of crisis,
but that it nevertheless acted as a means of inter-relating the
scattered religious beliefs of a region. It could be argued however
that the bhakti endorsed by the Gita is not identical with that which
was taught by later bhakti teachers. Whereas the single minded
devotion to a deity is retained, the social content changes substan­
tially and is expressed in a concern with a universal ethic which
echoes that of the Buddhist and Jainas and which permits the bhakti
movements to become powerful mobilizers of various social
groups. There is an almost apparent contradiction between the
emphasis on caste-duty in the Gita and the universal ethic of the
later bhakti movement
In his handling of Buddhist texts Kosambi uses them mainly
to draw out data on social and economic life and much of his
discussion on early trade, for instance, is based on these sources.
This was not new as such data had earlier been extracted from
these sources by scholars of Buddhism such as Rhys Davids12 and
Fick.13 Kosambi co-related this data with evidence from Sanskrit
sources but above all from archaeological excavations and con­
temporary inscriptions and brought the Buddhist material into the
wider orbit of reconstructing the history of the late first millen­
nium BC. The fact that the Buddhist sources do at times contradict
12 Buddhist India (London, 1903).
13 The Social Organisation in North East India in Buddha's Time (Calcutta,
1920).
94 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
the brahmanical tradition was for him a particularly important
aspect of the Pali texts and invested them with the kind of authen­
ticity which he found invaluable. The recognition of this feature
he owed to his father's work on the Buddhist texts.14
His knowledge of Sanskrit led Kosambi to a series of ety­
mological analyses which he used to great effect in reconstructing
the social background, particularly of the Vedic period.15 Thus he
argued that the names of many of the established brahmanas in
Vedic literature and the Puraruc tradition clearly pointed to their
being of non-Aryan origin. Some were given the epithet, dasi-putra
(such as Dirghatamas) or else their names suggested totems, as for
instance, Ajigarta or Ka&yapa. Further, that the original seven
gotras of the brahmanas were of mixed Aryan and non-Aryan
priests. His analysis of the gotras led him into a debate with John
Brough.16 From the study of the gotras he went on to the logical
point that the language of the Vedic texts could not have been pure
Aryan and must have had an admixture of non-Aryan elements
reflecting the inclusion of non-Aryans as brahmanas. This theory is
now more acceptable to those who have worked on Indo-Aryan
linguistics, on the basis of the linguistic analyses of the texts and
language which clearly indicates non-Aryan structures and forms
both in syntax and vocabulary.17 Kosambi's own use of linguistic
analyses bears the stamp of philology and he was evidently less
familiar with the changes in linguistic practices of the mid-twen­
tieth century. His etymological reconstruction of Satakami as
Indo-Austric is an example of this where he makes no attempt to
14ISIH, p. 174, f.n.1.
15 'Early Brahmans and Brahmanism' JBBRAS, 1947, XXIII, pp. 39-46; 'On
the Origin of the Brahman Gotra/ JBBRAS, 1950, XXVI, pp. 21-80. 'Brahman
Clans/ /AOS, 1953,73, pp. 202-8.
16 J. Brough, The Early Brahmanical System of Gotra and Pravara (Cambridge,
1953); D.D. Kosambi, 'Brahman Clans' /AOS, 1953,73, pp. 202-8.
17 T. Burrow, The Sanskrit Language (London, 1965); B.M. Emeneau, Col-
lected Papers, (Annamalai University, 1967); MN. Dethpande and P. Hook,
Aryan and non-Aryan in India (Ann Arbor, 1979).
THE CONTRIBUTION OF DX>. KOSAMBI TO INDOLOCY 95
support his argument by providing other Austric links.18 The same
problem arises with his attempt to equate the Hittite khatti with
the Sanskrit Ksatriya and the Pali khettiyo.19
An area in which he successfully utilised his mathematical
knowledge was Indian numismatics and more especially in the
one coinage system on which he worked in great detail, namely,
the punch-marked coins which were in circulation between c.
500-100 BC. These were coins cut from a sheet of silver, each coin
bearing a set of symbols but with no legend. Hence their chronol­
ogy and the agency which issued them was an enigma. Kosambi
wished to demonstrate the application of scientific methods for
obtaining information from numismatic evidence. He worked on
a statistical analyses of their distribution with a meticulous weigh­
ing of each coin to ascertain loss of weight by wear and tear and
with a careful analysis of their fabric and alloy. By arranging the
coins in accordance with their weight and their set of symbols he
hoped to provide a chronological sequence of the coins and be­
lieved that this would in turn provide a due as to the source of
their issue.20 For the method to be successful the coins to be used
as control had to come from stratified excavations. These could be
tested against coins from hoards provided they were free from
encrustations. His analyses revealed that the average weight de­
creases when the symbols on the reverse increase. From this he
argued that coins in constant circulation would also be the ones to
be weighed and valued more frequently. He maintained that they
were originally issued by traders but were ratified by the kings'
valuers and marked with the kings' symbols. The next step was
the identifying of particular symbols as the marks of particular
kings. Whereas the statistical analyses of the coins is generally
accepted, the identifications of certain symbols with royalty re­
18 /S/H, pp. 229-30.
19 CCA/HO, p. 77.
20 'Study and Methodology of Silver Punch-Marked Coins' New Indian
Antiquary, 1941,4, pp. 1-35 and 49-76; 'The Effect of Circulation upon Weight
of Metallic Currency,' Current Science, 1942» XI, pp. 227-30; /S/H, p. 162ff.
96 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
main controversial with some numismatists still arguing that the
coins may not bear any royal marks. It does seem curious that with
major changes in the nature of the state and of royalty during this
period, the coins, if connected with royalty, should have remained
without any appreciable change in style. It seems implausible that
the Mauryan kings would not have issued special coins and would
have been content to merely ratify these issued by traders, for, if
nothing else they would at least have imitated the Persian and
Greek coins which were circulating in West Asia and with which
area Indian kings and traders were in contact. It seems more likely
that the coins continued to be issued and ratified by guilds as legal
tender, a suggestion which has been linked to the occasional
legend of negama (from nigamd?) on some issues from Taxila. The
evaluation of coins by the king's valuer as described in the Artha-
bastra would doubtless have applied to all coins irrespective of
where they were issued.
Kosambi's use of archaeology was in part to reconstruct the
prehistoric period where he literally walked the stretch around
Pune in an effort to record the archaeological data. On the basis of
his extensive fieldwork on microlithic sites and through his typol­
ogy of microlithic artefacts he was able to suggest the routes which
herders, pastoralists and incipient traders would have taken
across the western Deccan in the pre-historic period.21 Relating to
a more developed culture, he looked for continuities of archaic
artefacts and sought to explain these in their fullest function, for
example, the function of the saddle-quem which he explained
both with reference to those found in archaeological excavations
and as well as those in current use.22 By the term 'use' he meant
not merely the technological function but also the role of the object
in religious ritual He was also among the earliest scholars to
recognize the significance of the megalithic material and the
21 'Pilgrim's Progress; a contribution to the Prehistory of the Western
Deccan' in Myth and Reality, p. 11 Off.
22ISIH, p. 43ff.
THE CONTRIBUTION OF DX>. KOSAMBI TO INDOLOCY 97
potentialities which it held in the discussion on the origins of many
institutions.
x Added to the fieldwork was an intelligent understanding of
geo-morphology and topography. In many cases his assessment
of the historical importance of a site was based on the logic of
geography. This he felt should indicate to the historian where to
look for sites and the likely nature of the sites. This approach is
demonstrated in what can only be called a brilliantly insightful
discussion of the trade routes from the west coast upto the plateau
and across the ghats in the western Deccan.23 Geographical con­
siderations were partially responsible for the location of urban
centres and Buddhist monasteries in this area during the first
millennium AD with a continuity of Maratha forts and British
railway links in the second millennium.
It was the recognition of cultural survival which led Kosambi
to weave so much material from ethnology and anthropology into
his historical narrative. This is perhaps best demonstrated in the
pages of his Introduction to the Study of Indian History, where he
describes what he sees in the vicinity of his house in Pune.24 Here
we have history virtually on the door-step, what with the encamp­
ment of a nomadic group, the presence of a tribe which had once
given rise to a jati, and of another which became a quasi-guild. He
noticed trees and sacred groves, stones marking a sacrificial ritual,
caves and rock shelters which may have been occupied successive­
ly by prehistoric men, by Buddhist monks and later by prac­
titioners of Hindu cults. Such places have a remarkable continuity
as sacred centres and often provided a greater historical continuity
both in object and ritual than many written texts. These for him
were primary areas for archaeological and historical investigation.
It is important to clarify that Kosambi was not arguing that religion
played a more significant part in Indian culture than has been the
case in other cultures, as has been the stand of those who maintain
23 Ibid., p. 246ff.
u Ibid., p. 24ff.
98 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
the greater spirituality of the Indian past; but rather, Kosambi's
position is that there was a greater survival of the archaic in
religious ritual than in other areas of Indian life which speaks of a
certain conservatism but at the same time makes it worth inves­
tigating historically. This perspective on culture is again demon­
strated in the discussion on the probable Harappan religious
forms and their continuity into later periods.
Kosambi had little use for physical anthropology. For him,
both the measuring of nasal indexes and the theories on the racial
identities of India derived therefrom, were worthless.25 At a wider
anthropological level he maintained that one of the clues to under­
standing the Indian past was the basic factor of the transition from
tribe to caste, from small, localized groups to a generalized so­
ciety.26 This transition was largely the result of the introduction of
plough agriculture in various regions which changed the system
of production, broke the structure of tribes and clans and made
caste the alternative form of social organization. This process he
traced in part from the evolution of clan totems into clan names
and then into caste names. The agency through which plough
agriculture was introduced would therefore become the major
factor of control in caste society. This agency he saw as the brah-
manical settlements in various parts of the country. These led to
an assimilation of local cults into the brahmanical tradition as is
evident from the various Puranas and Mahatmyas. But equally
important it led to the sanskritization of local folk cults with the
incorporation of brahmam priests and rituals, the association of
epic heroes and heroines, and by the inclusion of such cults in
Sanskrit mythology.
The interpretation of myths is essential to any study of early
cultures and Kosambi's work is peppered with such interpreta­
tions. In a detailed discussion of the story of Pururavas and Urva&
which he traces through its many varients in the texts,27 he dismis-
25 Scvetskaya Etnografia, Ak. Nauk USSR, No. 1., 1958, pp. 39-57.
26 ISIH.f p. 24ft.
27 'Urvafel and Pururavas' in Myth and Reality, p. 42ft.
THE CONTRIBUTION OF DX>. KOSAMBI TO INDOLOCY 99
ses the simplistic nature-myth interpretation of Max Muller and
his contemporaries who saw the disappearance of Urva£i as sym­
bolic of the vanishing dawn on the rising of the sun. Kosambi
attempts a functional anthropological analysis in which he argues
that it reflects the institution of sacred marriage in prehistoric
societies as well as the ritual sacrifice of the hero by the mother
goddess.28 One of the frequent strands in his explanations of
myths was related to his belief that societies were matriarchal in
origin and many gradually changed to patriliny and that myths
therefore reflect the transition from the one to the other. This view
was largely derived from the writings of F. Engels29 and what one
might call the 'mother-right school of anthropology/30 He applied
the same argument to explain the kumbha symbol or birth from a
jar of certain brahmam gotras and of the Kauravas in the Maha-
bharata where the jar has an obvious symbolic equation with the
womb. Bride-price is also for him a survival of matriliny.31 The
insistence on a transition from matriarchy to patriliny in every case
is not now acceptable since many societies are known to have been
patrilineal from the beginning. It is curious that the structural
study of myths was known at that time but Kosambi shows little
interest in it.
I have tried to indicate the various ways in which Kosambi
contributed to Indological studies in his handling of the various
sources and data. That his scholarship ranged over a variety of
aspects was in conformity with the best Indological tradition
which required a many faceted scholar who could claim famil­
iarity with different source materials. What distinguished Kosam-
28 'At the Crossroads: a study of mother goddess cult sites/ Myth and
Reality, p. 82ff.
29 The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State (London, 1946).
30 e.g. R. Briffault, 77« Mothers (New York, 1927); O.R. Ehrenfels, Mother
Right in India (London, 1941).
31ISIH, p. 27. In his letters to Vidal-Naquet dated 18.9.1965 and 27.9.1965
he provides further examples of this in the wealth paid by Bhima for the
marriage of Pindu to MSdri, the Madra princess, Mahabharata 1.105.1. and
also in the form of the marriage of Arjuna to Subhadrt, of the Yadu tribe.
100 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
bi from other scholars was that his ultimate concern was with an
overall theoretical frame-work, into which, not only was his scat­
tered research directed, but which he propounded as an attempt
to comprehend the totality of Indian history. His first book. An
Introduction to the study of Indian History, drew together the‘many
themes on which he had researched in earlier years and which he
had published as papers in various journals of Oriental Studies.
This book was to prove his claim not merely to being a historian
but to changing the paradigm for early Indian history.
For Kosambi, Marxism provided the clue to understanding
the past and he identified his method unambiguously with Mar­
xism. Kosambi would doubtless have accepted the judgement of
Jean Paul Sartre that Marxism is the 'necessar/ philosophy of our
time, by which he meant that even if Marx's particular conclusions
are un-acceptable, the method of analysis which he had worked
out is virtually unavoidable in the social sciences. Many among
the non-Marxist and anti-Marxist historians in this country tried
to dismiss the book with the predictable critique of all Marxist
histories, that the author was forcing the facts to fit a preconceived
theory: a critique which is applied ad nauseam to many versions of
knowledge which are intellectually uncomfortable for those who
are incapable of changing the paradigm and who are fearful of
scholars attempting to do so. A few among the more intellectually
gifted realized that what Kosambi was doing was not forcing the
facts to fit the received Marxist pattern on Indian history, but was
instead using a Marxist methodology to investigate a possible
pattern and suggest a new framework; that in fact he was using
the method creatively. As he himself states elsewhere, Marxism
was not being "proved" or "justified", but simply being used as a
tool of professional investigation. And this was also part of the
reason why he was regarded with suspicion by the then Marxist
political establishment in this country, the people whom he has
referred to in his writings as the OM—the Official Marxists!32
32 In the introduction to Exasperating Essays (Poona, 1957), pp. 3-4 and on
THE CONTRIBUTION OP DD. KOSAMBI TO INDOLOGY 101
Enthusiastic support came to him from intellectuals interested in
Marxism and in history and from liberal intellectuals in Europe
and America. It is significant that Kosambi was invited to give a
series of lectures on the history of Hinduisiu at London University
and to lecture at the Oriental Institute in Moscow in 1955, and this
was before any Indian University took such a step.
I would like now to consider his approach to early Indian
history with which he was centrally concerned. In the context of
his general argument of the transition from tribe to caste, socio­
economic formations were his primary interest. He draws his
evidence on tribal forms both from literary sources as well as from
the survival of such groups into recent centuries and from their
interaction with peasant groups. The earliest of such transitions
occurred in the Indus valley; hence Kosambi's concern with agrar­
ian technology at that time.33 He assumed that it was a culture
without the plough, that the river bank was cultivated with a
harrow and that the seasonal flood water was utilized for irriga­
tion with dams and embankments helping in retaining this water
and the river silt for a longer period. The decline of the Indus
civilization is attributed to the Aryans who destroyed the agricul­
tural system by breaking the embankments, which action he main­
tains, is symbolically referred to in the Rgvedic descriptions of
Indra destroying Vytra, and releasing the waters. Kosambi was of
the opinion that the plough was brought by the Aryans [i.e. the
speakers of Indo-Aryan] who thereby changed agricultural tech­
nology. Recent evidence on the Indus civilization makes it clear
that plough agriculture was practised even as early as the pre-
p. 18. He says of them, 'These form a decidedly mixed category, indescribable
because of the rapidly shifting views and even more rapid political permuta­
tions and combinations. The OM included at various times several factions
of the CPI, the Congress Socialists, the Royists and numerous left splinter
groups... The OM Mandsm has too often consisted of theological emphasis
on the inviolable sanctity of the current party line, or irrelevant quotations
from the classics.'
33 Ibid., p. 62«.
102 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
Harappan period and that the plough was known to the non-
Aryan since the more commonly used word, for the plough in
Vedic literature is of non-Aryan etymology.34 The theory of the
destruction of the embankments is conjectural and may have
greater application to dams built to prevent the flooding of
the cities rather than for agricultural purposes. Nevertheless the
question posed by Kosambi as to why the agrarian base of the
Harappan culture declined and was unable to support an urban
civilization in the later stages still remains a valid one and is now
sought to be answered by evidence of a far reaching ecological
change with which Harappan technology could not cope and
which eventually resulted in the location of new urban centres in
the Ganges valley.
Although he had no use for any theory of an Aryan race,
Kosambi did support the idea of the Aryan speaking peoples
having settled in north-western India and spreading gradually
into the Ganges valley, in both cases initially as conquerors.35 Such
a theory of conquest had been questioned by those working in
Indo-Aryan linguistics and it is now being proposed that conquest
should be replaced by considering the possibility of migrations
and technological changes being responsible for the arrival and
the dominance of the Aryan speakers, the resulting long period of
co-existence between them and the indigenous peoples being
suggested by the evidence of bi-lingualism. Even the archaeologi­
cal data which was once put forward to support the destruction of
the Harappan cities by invaders is now discounted.36 The new
evidence however tends to strengthen the more important point
made by Kosambi that much of the Indian tradition from the
earliest Vedic texts is already an amalgam of Aryan and non-
Aryan as indeed are even those of the highest caste.
Plough agriculture and iron technology when it was intro­
34 Romila Thapar, 'The Study of Society in Ancient India' in Ancient Indian
Social History: Some Interpretations (New Delhi, 1978) p. 21 Iff.
35 CCA/HO, p. 41.
36 Romila Thapar, op. cit.
THE CONTRIBUTION OF D.D. KOSAMBI TO INDOLOCY 103
duced into the Ganges valley led ultimately to the growth of urban
centres as well as the recognizable forms of caste. Recent views
would include as causal factors in this development, the role of a
change in crop patterns with a dependence on rice agriculture, the
diversity of irrigation systems, the use of labour in the new tech­
nologies and the range of control over these factors by different
social groups. This is a fleshing out, as it were, of Kosambi's
argument by extending the span of causal factors. Analyses of the
structure of caste at this time in terms of the theoretical form given
to the actuality, gives further rein to the question implicitly raised
by Kosambi, namely, the degree to which ideology and social
structure are inter-connected.
The Maury an monarchy which controlled the Indian sub-con­
tinent was a feasible political system according to Kosambi be­
cause of the expansion of the village economy through sudra
agriculturalists being settled on state lands and by the deportation
of prisoners-of-war who were used for the same purpose.37 He
argues against the use of slavery in production in early India and
prefers the theory of hudra helotage, although he does not develop
this theory fully. The decline of the Mauryan empire is attributed
to an economic crisis, the details of which are debatable. His
argument that the currency was debased devolves from his own
chronological interpretation of the coins, which as we have seen,
is not entirely acceptable, as also the argument that double crop­
ping indicated an economic crisis, for we now know from ar­
chaeological sources that double cropping was an established
practice even in earlier centuries.38 However, that the inability of
the Mauryan polity to survive must be attributed to causes which
in part were certainly economic, cannot be doubted. A more
plausible analysis would be to examine the nature of the Mauryan
polity in terms of whether the existing man power and agricultural
Vism,v. I76ff.
*
K.A. Chaudhuri, Ancient Agriculture and Forestry in Northern India
(Bombay, 1977).
104 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
resources were conducive to such a system. Equally important is
the question of whether the polity was as centralized as has been
made out in historical studies.
Kosambi's treatment of the rise of the Buddhist, Jaina and
other sects of that time links them to major technological changes
and to urbanism. But above all he maintains that they reflect a
situation of detribalization in which they attempt to reach out
across castes to a wider social range through their universal ethic.
He argues forcefully in support of a mercantile patronage ex­
tended to these sects which rooted them in society more firmly
than did the help they received from royal patronage. The punch-
marked coins are for him an indication of developed commodity
production99 which provided a high status for artisans and traders
as members of utban society and their link with religions pro­
pagating a universal ethic would not be surprising. This link was
demonstrated in his discussion of the post-Maurya period where
he examines the role of guilds and artisans as donors to the
Buddhist sangha in the light of the expansion and diffusion of
trade. The emergence of occupational jatis in urban areas can
frequently be associated with this development.
An evident departure from the orthodox Marxist pattern of
historical periodization is Kosambi's refusal to apply either the
Asiatic Mode of Production or the Slave Mode of Production to
early Indian history without modifications of a major kind. For
Karl Marx the Indian past conformed, by and large, to what he
called the Asiatic Mode of Production characterized by a static
society, an absence of private property in land, self-sufficient
villages, a lack of a commercial economy and by a state control
over the irrigation system. Although he and Engels recognized
deviations from this pattern, they saw this pattern as a contrast to
that prevalent in Europe and argued that historical stagnancy in
India was broken by the coming of colonialism. This was not
altogether acceptable to Kosambi, for whom the key to the Indian
39 CCAIHO, p. 125.
THE CONTRIBUTION OF DD. KOSAMBI TO INDOLOGY 105
past in the advance of plough agriculture over tribal society made
a static histoiy impossible. Of the notion of the self-sufficient
village economy he writes, ' ... acute and brilliant as these re­
marks are, they remain misleading nevertheless ... The de­
pendence of the village on external sources for salt and metals
would automatically preclude self-sufficiency. Elsewhere he has
argued for the existence of the tenant and of the landowning
peasant.41 He did however concede that from the end of the Gupta
period there was a relative increase in self-sufficiency and this
brought with it a static mode of production which was not the
Asiatic mode for it came about during a period of feudalism.42 He
also argued that the lack of a sense of history and the power of
myth further reduced individuality. A static mode of production
could not have co-existed with a form of feudalism since the latter
breeds its own contradictions. Perhaps if he had been questioned
on this ambiguity he may have modified his position to argue that
the degree of self-sufficiency increased, but not to the extent of the
static mode of production becoming the dominant feature.
Elaborating his views on the Asiatic Mode of Production he
wrote
The real difficulty here (not in China) is the misleading documentation.
Andent Indian records derive from the brahman caste and those who
read them pay no attention to the function of caste in andent—(as well
as modem and feudal) Indian soaety. Indian histoiy is, to me, a very fine
example of Mandst theory working very well in practice. Unfortunately,
Marx had only the solitary report of Buchanan-Hamilton on Kamatak
villages, not even the Foral of 1640 by the king of Portugal guaranteeing
the rights of Goa village communities, which existed in a much more
primitive form, and which could not be called 'hydraulic', in view of the
torrential rainfall The Goan organisation (which I have studied else­
where, Myth and Rtality, Chapter V) was actually the model for the
Kamatak settlement, and survived almost to this day.
40 ISIH, p. 244.
41CCA1HO, p. 101.
42 ISIH, p. 244ff.
106 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
•
It follows that 'Oriental Despotism' has to be looked at from some other
points of view than Wittfogel's hydraulic social aberrations. It seems to
me that the two main Marxist considerations are: (1) The incidence of
commodity production (per head) with the relative ease of food-gather-
ing. This becomes vital when you consider Africa. By the way, the
Pharoah's main function was not regulation of water or irrigation, but
distribution of the numerous materials which had all to be imported
from a long distance, including wood, metals, and so on. Henri Frankfort
has a very neat answer to Toynbee, where he brings this out, in contrast
to Mesopotamian development of numerous warring cities. (2) The need
to use overriding force to compel the people (in an environment where
food-gathering was, however, irregular, always possible) to change over
to food-production Le. agriculture with the plough. In Egypt food-
gathering was different except in the delta, but the cultivator had to be
kept at his work. You will find that the British had to impose a poll-tax
in Africa in order to get cheap labour for the mines and the white man's
farms.
If you grant this, then it follows that despotism, even of the so-called
oriental type, was a tool (however disgusting) used to bring a more
productive form of society into existence. But during this very process,
there came into being a class of state servants, state nobility or ad­
ministrators—at times priests, who reduced the need for violence and
helped develop the back-lands (as did my own ancestors in Goa and the
Buddhist monasteries in China as well as in the Deccan). This class then
used the absolute, despotic monarchy and the more or less passive
substratum for its own purposes. Hence the changeless appearance of
the country, seeing that the actual tools of production need not become
more efficient. Under such circumstances, feudalism is a special develop­
ment used to keep the rule in the hands of a ruling warrior caste-dass,
often conquerors. Don't be misled by the supposed Indian kshahiya caste,
which was oftener than not a brahmanical fiction....43
His rejection of the Slave Mode of Production as applicable to
the Indian past arose from a hesitation in applying the accepted
Marxist periodization of European history. Marx had suggested
that primitive communism gave way to a slave mode of produc­
tion predominant in Greco-Roman antiquity and this in turn gave
43 Letter to Pierre Vidal-Naquet dated 4.7.1964.
THE CONTRIBUTION OF DD. KOSAMBI TO INDOLOGY 107
rise to feudalism in Europe from which evolved the capitalist
mode of production. Kosambi was averse to the mechanical ap­
plication of this model to India as had been done by various
historians in Soviet Russia and in India, as for example, by
S.A. Dange. Kosambi was caustic in his evaluation of Dange's
book. From Primitive Communism to Slavery, which he said followed
the Russian analysis and which analysis, '... saves a certain type
of "left intellectual' the trouble of reading anything else or think­
ing for himself/44 Kosambi's analysis differed from any existing
model He maintains that the statement of the Greek ambassador
Megasthenes (of the fourth century BC) that there was an absence
of slavery in India was correct because Megasthenes makes a
comparison with Sparta which suggests helots instead of slaves.45
Kosambi states that at this period the küdras were essentially
helots. He does not however discuss in greater detail the nature of
ktidra helotage. Whereas the origin of the küdra caste could perhaps
be traced to a form of helotage, the classification cannot hold for
the entire past. At the ideological level it would be clearly con­
tradicted by the early Dharmaèâstra exposition of the varna theory
where the origin of the küdra is attributed to mixed caste marriages
including those involving the upper castes. Such a theory even if
not based on actuality would have undermined the notion of
helotage. The possibility of a Slave Mode of Production in early
India is problematical since it is difficult to assess the ratio of slaves
to other forms of labouring men nor is there a clear distinction
between slaves in domestic employ or in agricultural and craft
production. Doubtless these numbers would also have varied in
the ganasangha chiefships where they were probably higher and in
the kingdoms where with a diversity of labour, slavery for produc­
tion may have been smaller. It would also be important to consider
44 Ibid., p. 6; see also, 'Marxism and Ancient Indian Culture'. ABORI, 1949,
29, pp. 271-77. Kosambi's views on his relations with the Communist Party
of India over his review of Dange's book and his relations with Dange are
described in his letters to Vidal Naquet dated 22.11.1963 and 4.1Z1963.
^/SIH, p. 187.
108 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
the degree of unfreedom of the dasa in relation to the karma-
kora, bhritaka and hudra which would involve questions of the legal
status of these categories.
The Feudal Mode of Production Kosambi accepts as relevant
to pre-modem Indian history, although even here he makes his
own distinction between what he calls, 'feudalism from above'
and 'feudalism from below', and which he regards as the peculiar
features of Indian feudalism. Feudalism from above was his Char­
acterization of the changes which came about in the late first
millennium AD subsequent to the Gupta period.46 Incidentally he
has little time for the Gupta period and is justifiably contemptuous
of the nationalist historians who described it as the golden age of
Hindu revivalism. His contempt is summed up in the sentence,
'Far from the Guptas reviving nationalism, it was nationalism that
revived the Guptas/47 Recent research has not only tarnished
some of the golden quality of this age, but has on occasion even
revealed that a part of it was mere tinsel. The changes noticeable
in the post-Gupta period were mainly those of an increase in the
granting of land with a greater frequency of transition from tribe
to caste through the introduction of plough agriculture, a decline
in trade and commodity production which adversely affected the
growth of urban centres, the decentralization of the army and a
concentration of wealth at local courts. With this was associated
the spread of bhakti cults whose emphasis on loyalty and devotion
he saw as a characteristic feature of feudal society. In a discussion
on private property in land, central to the concept of the Asiatic
Mode of Production, he argues that it should be viewed in the
Indian context which implies, firstly, that actual cultivators were
ex-tribals who still regarded land as territory deriving from kin­
ship rights, secondly, the holding of a field was proof of member­
ship of community rather than ownership of land and thirdly, that
in a non-commodity producing village or one located near waste
46 Ibid., p. 275.
47 Ibid., p. 291.
THE CONTRIBUTION OF DD. KOSAMBI TO INDOLOCY 109
land, land would have no sale value. The only conditions were the
regular payment of taxes to either the grantee or the king. These
arguments read more like an attempt to somehow salvage the
notion of the absence of private property without a willingness to
admit the pattern of the Asiatic Mode of Production as an ex­
planatory model. Nor are these arguments wholly convincing
because although in some areas the cultivators were recent con­
verts to peasantry in others they were peasants of long standing
since many of the grants of land were made in villages of well-es­
tablished cultivators. The statement that land had no sale value in
newly settled areas is contradicted by inscriptional evidence in
some areas where, in Bengal for example, land is sold and the price
is stated in districts which were regarded as being on the edge of
waste land.48 Part of the problem with his analysis of the two
phases of feudalism, and this is a problem of which he is well
aware, is that no generalization can cover the entire sub-continent
since the changes varied from region to region.49
In his discussion on feudalism from below he draws his evi­
dence mainly from Kashmir and Rajasthan and depicts a more
clearly recognizable form of feudalism but with specific Indian
features.90 This phase is characterized by political decentralization
accompanied by a low level of technology with production for the
household and the village and not for a market, and the holding
of land by lords on a service tenure who also have judicial or
quasi-judicial functions in relation to the dependent population.
The Indian features were the absence of demesne fanning on the
lord's estate by forced labour where in many cases, slaves were
used instead, leading to an increase in slaves; there was also an
absence of guilds and of any organized church. The backwardness
of technology allowed of an easy conquest of northern India by
those with a more advanced military technology. Changes in the
iQ
B. Morrison, Political Centres and Culture Regions in Early Bengal (Tucson,
1970).
^CCAtHO.p.m tf.
50ISIH, p. 326».
110 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
ruling class did not substantially affect the nature of feudalism in
India and it continued until the coming of colonialism.
Kosambi's definition of feudalism would today find its critics
as also would its general applicability to the sub-continent be
debated. On the latter point one would have to consider whether
other systems prevalent in other parts of the sub-continent would
seriously subtract from the generalization.51 The nature of control
over land was different in parts of the peninsula as also was the
condition of trade, where the rise of powerful guilds was charac­
teristic of this period. The increase in the number of slaves was not
such as to constitute a Slave Mode of Production and as Kosambi
maintains quite correctly there was no slave economy of the
Roman kind to initiate the institution of the manor. The existence
of serfdom has also been suggested for many areas. Although
there was no organized church nevertheless there is what Max
Weber has called 'monastic landlordism' both among Buddhist
and Hindu sects, which at some levels was a parallel system to that
of church lands in Europe. The monastic centres of this period
were opulent and powerful. Kosambi argues that religious sects
frequently failed to provide the ethical and religious values by
which they had once held the society, but he does not consider the
monastic institution as the foci of political and economic control,
a role which it often played at this time.52
It is curious that Kosambi takes as his model feudalism in
England and shows no familiarity with the classic work on feudal
society by Marc Bloch which would have been far more pertinent
to his analyses. (His facility in French would have enabled him to
have read Marc Bloch in the original). In a sense, this points
to something of a narrowness in his wider historical reading.
Although far from being an orthodox Marxist he nevertheless
showed little interest in schools of analyses other than the Marxist
51 R.S. Sharma had argued for a substantial similarity in many parts of
northern India, Indian Feudalism (Calcutta, 1965).
52 An example of the analysis of this role can be found in H. Kulke,
Jagannatha Kult and Gajapati Konigtam (Weisbaden, 1979).
THE CONTRIBUTION OF DX>. KOSAMBI TO INDOLOGY 111
as far as interpreting early societies was concerned. He does not
for example indicate any familiarity with the works of those who
were critical of Lewis Morgan and Frederick Engels inspite of
using Marxist analyses as a starting point for the study of early
societies, such as Karl Polyani. It is also curious that inspite of his
interest in French scholarship (arising out of a concern with French
colonial activities in Vietnam and North Africa) he was not intro­
duced to the writings of French historians such as Fernand Braudel
with which, one suspects, he would have found a rapport.
Whereas his respect for the works of Gordon Childe and George
Thomson is evident in his own studies, his acquaintance with
Moses Finley's work on the Greeks came later53 and one wonders
whether he would have analysed the Indian epics in a manner
similar to Finley's analysis of the Greek epics. Convinced as he was
of the correctness of one methodology, Kosambi seems to have
found the debate on methodology unnecessary. His utilization of
Indian anthropological literature was more as a source of ethnol­
ogy and a study of survivals and indigenous forms rather than as
a means of examining the validity of any anthropological method.
Possibly this limitation may also have been due to the tendency
among Indian Marxists at that time to confine themselves to the
writings of British Marxists, which can perhaps be explained as a
curious reflection on the limitations of colonial scholarship where,
even in radical circles the intellectual metropolis remained British
with occasional forays into the writings of Soviet scholars. This Is
in striking contrast to more recent years in which the translations
of European Marxist writing and that from other parts of the world
are as widely read as the works of British Marxists.54 A more
53 M. Finley, The World of Odysseus, was first published in 1954. The fact
that he was initially working in the United States would at that time have
made his books less easily available in India. Kosambi refers to his study
Ancient Creeks as being most stimulating, rafter than to his more acclaimed
work on the Greek epics.
54 The easy availability of English translations has helped in this, such
translations resulting mainly from the interest in Neo-Marxism on the part
112 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
mundane explanation may be the paucity of new books at that
time and Kosambi was very conscious of this lack of availability
of up-to-date research. In his personal correspondence with
scholars in fields other than Indology he makes repeated requests
to be kept informed of new studies since such information was not
available in India. Where he could obtain such works he read them
with great thoroughness and commented at length on them, as for
example, on Maurice Godelier's views on early societies, many of
which views he endorsed. That the deepest intellectual influence
on Kosambi came from the writings of Frederick Engels is evident
from both his books on Indian history.55
Such limitations, as these may be, are marginal to the serious
quality of Kosambi's work, a quality which is enhanced by the
intellectual honesty with which he justifies his use of Marxist
methodolgy. His was a mind which by any standards would be
considered outstanding. He combined in himself the best of a
rigorous Indian intellectual tradition and rejected the facile re­
vivalism and cultural chauvinism which in recent decades have
emasculated Indian thinking. In changing the paradigm Kosambi
presented a view of Indian history which sought answers to the
fundamental questions of how and why Indian society is what it
is today. He provided a new theoretical framework which was not
a mechanical application of theories derived from elsewhere but
was hammered out by his proficiency in handling a variety of
sources and the intellectual perceptions and originality of thought
of American radicals and academics. It is significant that some of the most
stimulating debates on precapitalist societies emanating from new Marxist
writing are to be found in the issues of the last fifteen years of Current
Anthropology and American Anthropobgist.
55 A view put forward in the course of a conversation by Charles Mala*
moud (who translated CCAIHO into French) and with which view I am in
agreement In a letter to Vidal-Naquet dated 4.6.1964 Kosambi writes, 'I
learned from these two great men (Marx and Engels] what questions to ask
and then went to fieldwork to find the answers, because the material did not
exist in published books/
THE CONTRIBUTION OF DD. KOSAMBI TO INDOLOCY 113
which he brought to bear on his explanations. Fresh evidence may
well lead to a reconsideration of the answers which he gave to
these questions but his questions and his concerns still remain
valid. Even in this reconsideration we are often dependent on the
leads which he initially gave and which he indicated were worth
pursuing. Kosambi raised the debate on early Indian history from
variations in narrative to contending theoretical formulations.
Above all he was concerned with the contemporary relevance
of his understanding of the past. But he insisted that the relevance
was never to serve any doctrinaire purpose,*56 rather, it should
stem from what he thought was the natural function of the his­
torian. I can only conclude with what he himself quoted as the
summation of the role of the historian. E.H. Carr writes: 'The
function of the historian is neither to love the past nor to eman­
cipate himself from the past, but to master and understand it as
the key to the understanding of the present. Great history is
written precisely when the historian's vision of the past is il­
luminated by insight into problems of the present.... The func­
tion of history is to promote a profounder understanding of both
past and present through the inter-relation between them.'57
56 CCA/HO, p. 24.
57 What is History? pp. 20,31,62.
Early India:
an Overview
The scope of ancient Indian history is undergoing some modi­
fication and the erstwhile ancient period, which stretched
from Harappan times to the early second millennium AD is now
being sub-divided into the ancient and the early medieval period.
The nomenclature 'early medieval' does little towards either ex­
plaining itself or the subsequent medieval period: but the differen­
tiation between pre-Gupta and post-Gupta history is a necessary
and welcome change as also is the continuity between the late first
millennium and the second millennium AD.
Harappan society remains enigmatic. There have been few
attempts at detailed reconstruction from the archaeological evi­
dence. This is in part because the variety of data required from
studies such as palaeo-botany, ecology and hydrology remains
limited for such a reconstruction and partially also because there
are few archaeologists working on India willing to attempt a
theoretical reconstruction in which the use of concepts from other
disciplines such as anthropology, demography and statistics
would be a prerequisite.1 Such a reconstruction is especially re­
1 An exception to this is the recent study of Harappan and West Asian
trade by Shereen Ratnagar, Encounters: The Westerly Trade of the Harappan
Civilisation (Delhi, 1981). A primary requirement relating to ecology and
hydrology would be a series of studies along the lines of those Robert
Maco Adams on Mesopotamia, particularly 77k Heartland of Cities (Chicago,
1981). Evidence from other disciplines can be utilized more effectively
through a larger input of scientific techniques into excavation and analyses
EARLY INDIA: AN OVERVIEW
quired with the fading of the so-called 'dark age' between the
Harappa Culture and Vedic society.2 The question as to how far
Vedic society is entirely Indo-Aryan or draws on the Harappan
tradition in language, ritual and institutions becomes even more
apposite than before.3
It is in the study of the many sub-periods within the broad
boundaries of the ancient period that fundamental questions arise,
providing scope for wide-ranging discussion. For a better defini­
tion of these sub-periods and in the interests of historical darity a
considerable refining of concepts and theories becomes necessary.
Many of the crucial terms used in the definitions have been ap­
as well as data gathered from such disciplines. This may well happen in the
near future now that archaeology the world over is drawing increasingly on
scientific sources and less on the study of the classics. This calls for a little
more theoretical daring on the part of archaeologists working on India and
a concern with questions relating to the nature of Harappan society. The
decipherment of the Harappa script, still a long way off, would of course be
a help and would involve using the more conventional techniques of linguis­
tics and cultural symbols. But the reconstruction of Harappan society could
be met half-way by an approach which tries to intelligently reconstitute the
society on the basis of material remains, environment and ecology. That the
interest in ecology and environment does not have a relevance limited to
archaeological data alone is dear from the recent Harris-versus-Heston
debate on why the cow is sacred in India. M. Harris, 'The Cultural Ecology
of India's Sacred Cattle/ Current Anthropology, 1966,7, pp. 51-60; A. Heston,
'An Approach to the Sacred cow of India,' Current Anthropology, 1971,12,
pp. 191-209; S. Odend'hal, 'Energetics of Indian Cattle in their Environ­
ment' Human Ecology, 1973, IJ. pp. 3-22.
2 Archaeological continuities are being discovered between Harappan
and post-Harappan societies as for example, in the repeated occurence of the
Black-and-red Ware from Harappan to proto-historic times and more recent­
ly the overlap in the Punjab between Late Harappan and the Painted Grey
Ware culture (generally associated with Vedic sotiety) J.P. Joshi and Mad-
hubala, 'Life During the Period of Overlap of Late Harappan and PGW
Cultures/ Journal ofthelndian Society of Oriental Art, 1977-78, NS, IX pp. 20-9.
3 Romila Thapar, 'The Archaeology of the Agnicayana/ in P. Staal, ed.,
AGN1—The Vatic Rihul of the Fire Altar, voL I (Berkeley, 1982).
116 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
plied to such diverse social forms that they cease to have a specific
meaning and tend to mask the diversities. This sharpening of focus
becomes particularly necessary with the growing interest in so­
cial and economic history. It will also help in understanding the
process of historical mutation over time. Although there is now a
rich literature describing segments of the period, the explanation
of change from one to the next and the linkages between these
require a fuller consideration. A creatively critical discussion is
called for on the terms used to translate categories mentioned in
the sources since much of the interpretation depends on such
discussion.
The nineteenth century was the age of the grand edifices of
historical explanation and theoretical construction. While some of
these edifices still stand firm, others are tottering. Even those
which still stand often require repair and renovation, sometimes
of a structural kind/ in the light of new knowledge and fresh
theories. The refining of concepts and theories therefore becomes
a necessary part of the historical exercise and is particularly in­
cumbent on those who, as conscientous historians, build their
explanations on the basis of theoretical frameworks.4 It is of this
need for the refining of concepts that I would like to speak.5
Among the early sub-periods, Vedic society has been de­
4 In the refining of concepts and theories the comparative method can be
a useful tool. This involves an awareness of the historical analyses of other
cultures and the use of specific categories of explanation which may not be
directly applicable to early Indian history, but which would nevertheless
generate questions and comparisons 'which can in turn assist in fresh analy­
sis. It Is to be deeply regretted that serious expertise on the ancient history
of areas outside the Indian sub-continent is generally unavailable in Indian
centres of research.
51 have elsewhere analysed in greater detail some of the themes which I
am touching upon here. Questions relating to lineage-based societies, the
sacrificial ritual and the peasant economy were considered by me in From
Lineage to State. A summary of these ideas was contained in a paper, 'State
Formation in Early India, International Social Science Journal, 1980, XXXH,
No. 4, pp. 655-669.
EARLY INDIA: AN OVERVIEW 117
scribed as a tribal one. The term 'tribal', which we have all used in
the past, has rightly come in for some questioning.6 In its precise
meaning it refers to a community of people claiming descent from
a common ancestor. In its application however, it has been used
to cover a variety of social and economic forms, not to mention
claims to biological and radal identities; and this tends to confuse
the original meaning. Even as a convention it has lost much of its
predsion. The more recently preferred term, lineage, narrows the
focus. Although the economic range remains, lineage does em­
phasize succession and descent with the implication that these are
decisive in determining social status and control over economic
resources. It also helps differentiate between chiefships where
lineage dominates and kingship, which as a different category,
evokes a larger number of impersonal sanctions. The concept of
vatnba (succession) carries a meaning similar to lineage and is
central to Vedic sodety with its emphasis on succession even as a
simulated lineage. Thus vamkt is used to mean lineage or descent
group among the rajanyas and ksatriyas but is also used in the list
of Upanisadic teachers where succession does not appear to be by
birth but by the passing on of a tradition of knowledge.7 Lineage
also becomes important in the structure of each varna, defined by
permitted rules of marriage and kinship and by ranking in an
order of status, the control over resources being implidt. The
emergence of the four varnas is thus dosely allied to the essentials
of a lineage-based sodety.8
In a stratified sodety the reinforcing of status is necessary. But
where there is no recognized private property in land and no
effective state such reinforcing has to be done by sanctions which
often take a ritual or religious form. In the absence of taxation as
a system of control in the Vedic period, sacrifidal ritual functioned
as the occasion for renewing the status of the yajamam, initially a
6 M.H. Fried, The Notion of Tribe (Menlo Park, 1975).
7 Brhadfrtmyaka Upanisad, II. 6. Iff; IV. 6. lit VL 5. Iff.
® Romila Thapar, From Lineage to State, pp. 37-69.
118 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
rajartya or a ksatriya. Apart from its religious and sodal role sacrifi­
cial ritual also had an economic function. It was the occasion when
wealth which had been channelled to the yajamSna was distributed
by him in the form of gifts to the brahtuma priests which
strengthened their sodal rank and ensured them wealth. The ritual
served to restrict the distribution of wealth to the brahmanas and
the fcsafriyas but at the same time prevented a substantial ac­
cumulation of wealth by either, for whatever came in the form of
gifts and prestations from the lesser dans, the vik, to the ruling
dans, the ksatriyas, was largely consumed in the ritual and the
remainder gifted to the brahmanas. Generosity being important to
the office of the chief, wealth was not hoarded. The display,
consumption and distribution of wealth at the major rituals such
as the rajasuya and the abvamedha, was in turn a stimulus to produc­
tion, for the ritual was also seen as a communication with and
sanction from the supernatural Embedded in the sacrifidal ritual
therefore were important facets of the economy. This may be a
partial explanation of why a major change to the state system and
a peasant economy occurred initially in the mid-first millennium
BC not in the western Ganga valley but in the adjoining area of the
middle Ganga valley. This change was occasioned not only by an
increase in economic production and a greater sodal disparity but
also by the fact that the prestation economy associated with the
lineage-based sodety became more and more marginal in the latter
region and in some areas was altogether absent.
The term 'peasant economy' is frowned upon by some
scholars as an imprecise concept.9 However it is of some use as a
measurement of change. The label of 'peasanf has been applied to
a variety of categories some of which are dissimilar. The use of a
9 J. Ennew et «/., "Peasantry as an Economic Category/ Journal of Peasant
Studies, 1977, IV, 4, pp. 295-322; M. Harrison, The Peasant Mode of Produc­
tion in the work of A. V. Chayanov/ Journal of Peasant Studies, 1977, IV, 4,
pp. 323-36; Utsa Patnalk, 'Neo-Populism and Marxism: The Chayanovian
View of the Agrarian Question and its Fundamental Fallacy/ Journal of
Peasant Studies, 1979, VI, 4, pp. 375-420.
EARLY INDIA: AN OVERVIEW 119
single word as a portmanteau description confuses the categories
and therefore a differentiation is necessary. Eric Wolf defines
peasants as:
... rural cultivators whose surpluses are transferred to a dominant
group of rulers that uses the surpluses both to underwrite its own
standard of living and to distribute the remainder to groups in society
that do not farm but must be fed for their specific goods and services in
turn.10
This definition seems to me inadequate, for the important
point is not merely the existence of a surplus but the mechanism
by which it is transferred and it is to this that I would relate the
emergence of a peasant economy. That the recognition of an
incipient peasant economy in various parts of India is significant
to the study of social history hardly needs stressing, since, con­
comitant with this is also the establishing of particular kinds of
state systems, varient forms of jatis and new religious and cultural
idioms in the area.
For the early period of Indian history the term peasant has
been used to translate both the Rgvedic vi£n as well as the gahapati
of Pâli sources. But some distinction is called for. The Vedic xrik was
primarily a member of a clan although this did not preclude him
from being a cultivator as well. The transferring of surpluses, in
this case the voluntary prestations of the vik to the ksatriya, points
to a stratified rather than an egalitarian society and the simile of
the ksatriya eating the viè like the deer eating the grain12 would
indicate greater pressures for larger prestations. But the transfer
was not through an enforced system of taxation. In the absence of
private ownership of land, the relationship of the vi$ to the Jksa-
triya would have been less contrapuntal with little need of an
10 E. Wolf, Peasants (New Jereey, 1966), pp. 5-4.
11 This was popularized through A.A. Macdonell and A.B. Keith's Vedic
Index of Names and Subjects, 191Z The technical term for the cultivator was
kînâèa and the root krs is used more frequently in association with cultivation.
12 Satapatha Brahmana, VIH. 7X2} VIII. 7.2.2; IX. 4,3,5.
120 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
enforced collection of the surplus. The context of Vedic references
to bait, bhaga and bulka (the terms used in later periods for taxes)
suggest that they were voluntary and random although the ran­
domness gradually changed to required prestations, particularly
at sacrificial rituals. However the three major prerequisites gov­
erning a system of taxation—a contracted amount, collected at
stipulated periods by persons designated as tax collectors—are
absent in the Vedic texts. The recognition of these prerequisites in
the post-Vedic period and the collection of taxes from the cul­
tivators by the state would seetfi decisive in registering the change
from cultivators to peasants in which the existence of an economy
based on peasant agriculture becomes clear.
The introduction of taxation presupposes the impersonal
authority of the state and some degree of alienation of the cul­
tivator from the authority to whom the surplus is given, unlike the
lineage-based society where prestations are more personalized.
Taxation reduced the quantity of prestations and became the more
substantial part of what was taken from the peasant, but presta­
tions were not terminated. The sanction of the religious ritual
becomes more marginal and that of the state more central, the
change occurring gradually over time. The formation of the state
is therefore tied into this change. For the cultivator land becomes
property or a legal entity and the pressures on cultivation have to
do not only with subsistance but also with a provision for ensuring
a surplus. This highlights the difference between appropriation in
the earlier system and exploitation in the latter.
The Vedic vib was more a generalized term in which herding,
cultivation and minimal crafts adequate to a household were
included. Such groups were germane to the later peasant house­
hold. In effect, because the relationship with the dominant ksa-
triya was based on gifts and prestations rather than on taxes, these
cultivators would seem part of a lineage society in which their
subservience to a dominant group arises more out of the exigen­
cies of kinship or the ordering of clans than out of exploited labour,
although the latter can be seen to increase in time.
EARLY INDIA: AN OVERVIEW 121
The gradual mutation which took place becomes evident from
the frequent references in the Pâli sources to the gahapati. The
existence of the gahapati focuses more sharply on the presence of
what might be called a peasant economy. But to translate gahapati
as peasant is to provide a mere slice of its fotal ¿leaning. Derived
from grhapati, the head of the household, the term gahapati includes
a range of meanings such as, the wealthy mahâbâla-brâhmanas
addressed as gahapatis by the Buddha,13 who had received as
donations extensive, tax-free, arable land as well as those who paid
taxes—the wealthy land-owners who cultivated their large farms
with the help of slaves and hired labourers (da$a-bhrtaka)}A Those
at the lower end of the scale who either owned small plots of land
or were professional ploughmen are more often referred to as the
Jtassafcfls.15 An intermediate group is also implied in one of the
Dharmaéütras.16 The Arthabàstra mentions tenants as upavâsa and
also refers to another category, the küdra cultivators settled by the
state on cultivable or waste land on a different system of tenure
from the above; as also the range of cultivators employed on the
state farms supervised by the overseers of agriculture, the stta-
dhyaksa}7
Gahapati with reference to agrarian society, therefore, is per­
haps better translated as the landowner of some substance who
would generally pay taxes to the state except when the land which
he owned was a religious benefice. Private land ownership and
13 e.g. Majjhima Nikâya, 1.401.
14 As for example the gahapati Mendaka, Mahâvagga, VI. 34.
15 Digfut Nikâya, I. 61; Samyukta Nikâya, 1,172; III. 155; IV. 314; Anguttara
Nikâva, I. 241; 229; 239.
'•■The BaudhSyam Dharmasütra III. 2. 1-4 refers to householders of the
upper vantas who can in some cases be tenants and who cultivate six
nivartanas QbighSs) of land. These were not poor peasants for they are also
described as éSlina, living in well-to-do homes, and would probably con­
stitute an intermediary category between the gahapati and thé kassaka. That
this was a recognized categoiy seems evident from their mode of subsistance
being described as sannivartana (six nivartanas).
17 in. io.8; n. l.i.
122 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
the payment of taxes demarcates this period as one in which a
peasant-based economy is evident. Traces of the lineage based
society continued in the marking of status by varna and the perfor­
mance, although by now of marginal economic significance, of the
sacrificial rituals.
That the gahapati was not even just a landowner but more a
man of means is supported by the fact that it was from the ranks
of the gahapatis that there emerged the setthis or financiers.18 The
two terms are often associated in the literature and this is further
attested in the votive inscriptions recording donations to the son-
gha in central India.and the western and eastern Deccan from the
late first millennium BC.19 Gahapati fathers have setthi sons as well
as the other way round. It would seem that gahapati status was
acquired through the practice of any respectable profession which
provided a decent income, although the most frequent references
are to land-ownership and commerce.
This is not to suggest that trade originated with the land­
owning groups but rather that the large-scale commercialiaztion
of exchange was tied to the emergence of the gahapati In examin­
ing the origins of trade it is necessary to define more clearly the
nature of the exchange involved. Broadly, there are some recog­
nizable forms of exchange which can either develop into commer­
cialized exchange or supplement it. There is evidence of luxury
goods exchanged by ruling groups as a part of gift-exchange.
Marriage alliances between ksatriya families involved an exchange
of gifts. Thus when Bharata visits his maternal kinsmen, he returns
with gifts.20 This is not an exchange based on need but is a channel
18 Anguttara Nikaya IV. 282; VIII. 1.16.
19 Epigraphia Indica, X. 1909-10. Luders List Nos: 1056, 1062, 1073,1075,
1121,1127,1209,1281, etc. The inscriptions are later than the P5li texts and
may indicate the repetition of a process which had occurred earlier in the
Ganga valley.
20 Ramayana VII. 90.1-5. Among the gifts were horses, probably imported
from GandhSra which was close enough to the Kekeya territory. The trade
in horses from the north-west would doubtless have been accelerated by
EARLY INDIA: AN OVERVIEW 123
through which status and kinship is confirmed. It may in addition
lead to other forms of exchange. The major royal sacrifices re­
quired tributes and gifts and the rajasuya of Yudhisthira provides
an interesting inventory of valued items.21 The more ordinary
sacrificial rituals involved the giving of gifts such as cattle, horses,
gold, dasis and chariots by the yajamana to the priests.22 These gifts
became part of a distribution and exchange of wealth which in the
lineage based societies formed the salient part of the wealth of
those who ruled, whereas in the change to an economy based on
peasant agriculture, they were merely a part of the wealth accumu­
lated by the ruling families and the more wealthy gahapatis.
Less spectacular but more essential was another form of ex­
change, that of raw materials and commodities brought by iti­
nerant groups such as smiths and pastoralists. It has been argued
that the itinerant metal smiths formed a network of connections
between villages.23 Metal, particularly iron, was also a major item
of regular trade. The role of pastoralists in trading circuits is now
coming in for considerable attention particularly with reference to
those groups which had a regular pattern of transhumance.24
Exchange through sources of itinerant professionals was probably
forms of exchange. Romila Thapar, The Ramayana: theme and variation,' in
S.N. Mukherjee, ed., India History and Thought (Calcutta, 1982), pp. 221-53.
21 Mahabharata, Sabha Parvan, 47.5; Romila Thapar, 'Some Aspects of the
Economics Data in the Mahabharata, ABORI (Poona, 1977-78), LIX, pp. 993-
1007; The Historian and the Epic/ ABORI, 1979, LX, pp. 199-213.
22 Romila Thapar, 'Dana and daksina as forms of exchange/ Ancient Indian
Social History: Some Interpretations, p. 105ff.
23 D.D. Kosambi, Introduction to the Study of Indian History, Bombay, 1956.
pp. 11,91.
24 Apart from the question of whether or not the Rgvedic Aryan speakers
introduced iron technology to northern India, it would be worth examining
whether as pastoralists there were patterns of movement which permitted
them to maintain a symbiotic relationship with pre-existing agricultural
communities. This would perhaps explain the factor of bilingualism in
Vedic Sanskrit.
124 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
the starting point of the beat of pedlars which is a continuing
feature of one level of exchange in India.
Yet another category is what might be called exchange be­
tween one settlement and the next. This is a useful basis for
plotting the gradual diffusion of an item, as for example, the better
quality varieties of pottery from excavations. Such an exchange
provides evidence not only on local trade but also on the geo­
graphical reach of intra-regional contacts. Some of these settle­
ments may then have come to play the role of local markets, the
equivalent perhaps of what the Pali texts refer to as nigama. These
in tum are likely to have been the nuclei of urban growth as in the
case of Rajagrha and ¿ravastf.25
Distinct from all these is the familiar picture of trade which
dominates the scene in the post-Mauryan period. This is the com­
mercial exchange between two or more centres processing and
producing commodities specifically destined for trade. The or­
ganization of this more complex form involved a hierarchy of
producers and traders some of whom were sedentary while others
were carriers of the items traded but of a different order from
pedlars and pastoralists. The picture of commercialized exchange
emerges from Buddhist texts and by the time of the Artha&astra, it
is regarded as a legitimate source of revenue for the state. The
question then arose of the degree of state interference and control
which would be conducive to increasing the finances of the state.26
The major artefact in this trade (other than the commodities) is
coined metallic money, providing evidence of the degree of com­
plexity and the extent of such trade and trading circuits. These
early coins in some instances were issued by the nigama and in
other cases may have been issued by local authorities or possibly
by ruling families. In the post-Mauryan period dynastic issues
gain currency, a clear pointer to the importance of commercialized
exchange. However even in this period local issues remain in
circulation suggesting multiple levels of exchange.
25 N. Wagle, Society at the Time of the Buddha (Bombay, 1966), p. 22.
26 Arthabastra IV. 2.
EARLY INDIA: AN OVERVIEW 125
With such commercialized exchange the control of trade
routes becomes a significant factor in political policy and military
annexations. A recent analysis of the Silk Trade, involving a var­
iety of levels of exchange from gift-exchange to sophisticated
emporia, in the context of political relations between tribal groups
and established centres of political power, suggests ways in which
the complicated question of trade, often treated as a uniform
monolith by historians of ancient India, may be investigated.27 The
Roman trade with India, as is clear from both commodities and
the function of money, also spans a similar range. Diverse forms
of exchange within a larger trading system suggest the coexistence
of various economic levels within that system and sharpen the
social contours of the groups involved.
The analysis of trade also requires locating those involved in
these exchanges in the social hierarchy of the time. In the produc­
tion of goods for exchange, artisans, whether individuals or in
guilds, relate to merchants and financiers in forms as diverse as
the various categories of cultivators to land-owners. The role of
the bilptn (artisan) and the brew (guild) is quite distinct from the
setthu Their presence registers a change in the nature of the trade
as also does the differentiation between categories of professionals
such as the vartija, the setthi and the sarthavaha. Clearly there is a
sea change when commercialized exchange becomes active. The
investment required for an elaborate trade can only be provided
27 M.C. Raschke, 'New Studies in Roman Commerce with the East/ in H.
Temporim and W. Haase, eds., Aufsteig und Niedergang der Romischen Welt
(Berlin, 1978) The Silk Trade spanning Central Asia, northern India and the
eastern Mediterranean drew on a variety of exchange systems and Raschke's
discussion on the role of silk as part of the exchange of gifts in Central Asia
provides a new perspective on that section of the trade. An almost graphic
representation of the varieties of exchange comes from the recent discoveries
of rock engravings and inscriptions, the latter from the KusSna period on­
wards along the Karakorum Highway in Gilgit K. Jettmar, Rock Carvings and
Inscriptions in the Northern areas of Pakistan (Islamabad, 1982); A.H. Dani,
Chilas (Islamabad, 1983).
126 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
by a well-endowed social group which can invest its surplus in
risk-taking ventures. The obvious category was the gahapati who
could fall back on land if the venture failed. That it turned out to
be highly successful is clear from the fact that not only did the
setthis emerge from the ranks of the gahapatis, but, by the post-
Mauryan period, had an independent identity as financiers and
gradually superceded the gahapatis.28 The wealth of the setthis
became in turn an avenue to power, for some of them were known
to be the financiers of kings and obtained in return rights to collect
revenue, perhaps the proto-type of what was later to become the
regular form of emoluments to administrative officers.29 On the
manifestations of trade, Buddhist and Jaina sources together with
epigraphic and archaeological evidence provide a useful counter­
point to the Dharmakastra literature.
The link between agriculture and commerce is important for
understanding the changes in the subsequent period. The opu­
lence of those involved in commerce was poured into the adorn­
ment of religious monuments, monasteries and images and in the
conspicuous consumption which is associated with the wealthier
towndwellers of these times. This tends to obscure the agrarian
scene where one notices less of maha&ala landowners and large
estates and more of those with small holdings. Small plots of land
could be purchased and donated to religious beneficiaries and it
seems unlikely, as has been argued, that such sales were restricted
to religious donations.30 Smallholdings together with the aliena­
tion of land could point to some degree of impoverishment among
peasants. The inclusion of debt bondage (ahitaka and atmavikreta),
as a regular if not frequent category of slavery,31 as well as the
increasing references to visti (forced labour or a labour tax), sug­
281. Fiser, 'The Problem of the Setthi in Buddhist JStakas/ Archiv Orientali
(Prague, 1954), XXII, pp. 238-66.
29 Ibid., p. 261.
30 The Artfa&Sstra refers dearly to the sale of land. II. 1.7; III. 9.3,15-17;
III. 10.9.
31 Arthaidstra in. 2; NSrada 1.128; V. 29; Manu XI. 59.
EARLY INDIA: AN OVERVIEW 127
gest a different rural scene from that of the preceding period. That
oppressive taxation had become a recognized evil is explicitly
mentioned in various texts.32
This mutation was endemic to the evident change in the
post-Gupta period. Where trade flourished there the resources of
the urban centres and the trade routes bouyed up the system; but
this period points to a declining trade in many areas.33 Internal
commercialized trade requires the ballast of agrarian settlements
and where lineage based societies could be converted into peasant
economies there the agrarian support to trade would be
strengthened. Earlier networks of exchange had permitted an
easier co-existence with lineagebased societies. Their resources,
generally raw materials such as timber and gem-stones could, as
items of exchange, be easily tapped by traders through barter and
direct exchange without disturbing the social structure to any
appreciable degree. On the other hand because of the requirement
of land and labour, state systems more heavily dependent on a
peasant economy had to absorb these societies and convert them
into peasant economies in order to extract the benefits. Where
trade declined or where new states were established the need to
develop the agrarian economy became urgent. The granting of
land appears to have been the mechanism adopted for changing
the agrarian situation. The reasons for this change in the post-
Gupta period need more detailed investigation particularly at a
regional level.3* In the very useful work done so far substantial
32 Visnu Purina IV. 24; Mahasupina Jaiaka No. 77; Mahabharata Aranyaka
Parvan 188.18ft &nti Parvan 254.39ff.
33 That the external trade—the Silk Trade and the Roman trade—played
a significant role in northern India is also dear from the negative evidence.
Areas where trade declined as in the Ganga valley shows a dedine in the
urban economy which has been pointed out by R.S. Sharma. Areas on the
northern borders of the sub-continent arterial to the Central Asian trade
flourished in the post-Gupta period.
34 A comparative regional analysis has become necessary with the recog­
nition not only of regional environmental differences but also variations in
the processes of change and the nature of change, particularly the fact that
128 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
data has surfaced. What is now required is a sifting and classifying
of the data to provide more precise answers and to evoke fresh
questions.35
not all changes coincide chronologically and completely in form. This makes
the study of regional history significant not only in terms of regional varia­
tions but also as a prerequisite to broader generalizations about the history
of the sub-continent
35 This work ties in with the debate on feudalism in India, and studies of
this period such as those of D.D. Kosambi, R.S. Sharma, B.N.S. Yadava, B.D.
Chattopadhyaya, D.N. Jha and H. Mukhia, in addition to many detailed
regional studies of the post-Gupta period, too numerousto list here.
Much of the argument on the debate on feudalism in India so far has been
of a generalized form. Perhaps what is required at this stage is comparative
regional views which could better cope with the areas of investigation which
call for analysis. Initially a few selected regions could be analysed in depth
for both the urban and the agrarian aspects of the economy, but a start could
be made with the agrarian. A tabulation of the data might sharpen the focus.
Grants in a region could be classified in accordance with the type of grantee
and the nature of the grant Categories could be defined such as grants of
waste land or cultivated land, grants converting lineage-based societies into
peasant economies where the grant would be made to the lineage chief, or
grants of state-owned lands already cultivated where cultivators were trans­
ferred along with the land, and other sudi categories where data is available.
The chronological order and quantum of each would be useful information.
Proprietory rights could also be part of this tabulation. At another level the
analyses of the titles of grantees and changes therein might provide dues.
The question of whether the peasantry was free hinges not only on the
technical and legal definitions but also requires a discussion of the actual
status of the peasant. Rights, obligations and dues of the grantees vis-à-vis
the peasants would need to be tabulated in detail. These would provide some
indications of the essentials of the prevailing system.
A worms's eye view of agriculture also needs to be investigated since
some aspects of the debate involve questions relating to soil fertility and
control over water resources. Some of these questions could be better hand­
led through inter-disdplinaiy research if historians were to work jointly with
specialists in soil analysis, and hydrology. The expertise of a wide range of
agricultural sdentists has entered into debates on the archaeological evi­
dence relating to agriculture, but curiously has not been invited by agrarian
historians into their domain. Now that the study of these subjects has become
EARLY INDIA: AN OVERVIEW 129
It is curious that there is little resort to the policy recom­
mended by the Artha&astra and other texts of establishing colonies
of cultivators on land owned by the state so as to extend agricul­
ture and thereby increase the revenue.36 Was the state unable to
do so because it lacked the administrative infrastructure or was it
because it did not have the power to implement such a policy?
Instead the state increases the grants of land to religious bene­
ficiaries and later to administrative officers in lieu of a salary. This
points to a need for an evaluation of the nature of 'early medieval'
states with the possibility that their formation and structure were
different from the previous ones. Was this type of state attempting
to restructure the economy to an extent greater than the previous
which appear to have been more concerned with revenue collect­
ing functions/ judging by the model advocated by Kautilya? Did
the system of granting land predominate (perhaps initially) in
so specialized this reluctance as well as the absence of field studies is to be
regretted. Considering that the data from survivals of various forms would
be much richer for medieval history than for the ancient period one only
hopes that a trend in this direction will develop soon. An increase in data of
the technical kind can assist the quality of theoretical analysis. Questions
more specific to the histoiy of agriculture relate to investigating cultivation
techniques, crop patterns, crop rotation, irrigation systems and water cesses,
the percentage of arable land available in an area which would condition
decisions about starting new settlements or intensifying existing agriculture,
variations in the system of fallow for particular crops, the size of holdings in
relation to the quality of the soil and the crops, the subsistence level of the
peasant labour input into land and crops and other similar questions. Many
of these questions would involve extrapolating back from revenue records
as well as considerable field work in the area under study, in order to sharpen
the questions and gain insights into possibilities for an earlier period. It is
not for nothing that R.H. Tawney is believed to have said that the first
essential of research into agrarian histoiy is a stout pair of boots.
36 Some grants are given of waste land and this would be a case of
extending the area under cultivation, but the revenue from this goes to the
grantee and not to the state, which makes it different from the situation
described in the Artha&Sstra. Südra cultivators are mentioned but in some
cases as labourers of land-owners, e.g. Manu IV. 253.
130 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
areas where lineage based societies were prevalent so as to fa­
cilitate their conversion to a peasant economy (where lineage
could also be used for economic control) and to a varna and jati
network? The identification with varna status would have acted as
a bridge to a peasant economy and prevented a rupture with the
lineage system. Elements of lineage have often continued even in
some areas where peasant agriculture became the norm.
Religious benefices were on the pattern of earlier grants and
were not strictly an innovation except that now grants were made
increasingly to brahmanas and ostensiblyin return for legitimizing
the dynasty and for acquiring religious merit.37 These were the
stated reasons for the grant but were not sufficient reasons. Grants
of this nature, as has been pointed out, were a channel of accul­
turation. They could also be used as fod of political loyalty.
If the grants were made initially from state-owned lands they
amounted to a renouncing of revenue. If the state was unable to
administer the extension of agriculture, was the system of grants
also introduced to encourage setdements in new areas where the
grant was of waste land, or frftematively, of cultivated lands to
stabilize the peasantry and induce increased production? Given
the fact that slaves were not used in any quantitative degree in
agricultural production at this time, was the system of grants an
attempt at converting the peasantry into a stable productive force
through various mechanisms of subordination and a chain of
intermediaries? Interestingly the term gahapatif grhapati drops out
of currency for the system had changed and terms incorporating
raja, samanta and bhogin become frequent. The recipients of land
grants had the right to receive a range of taxes and dues previously
collected by the state and were soon given administrative powers
as well. This permitted them to act as a 'back-up' administration
where the grant was in settled areas and to introduce the system
37 Legitimacy was necessary where the dynasty was of obscure origin or
was described as having served the previous one e.g., F.E Pargiter, The
Purana Texts of the Dynasties of the Kali Age, Oxford, 1913, pp. 38,45,47, 55,
56.
EARLY INDIA: AN OVERVIEW 131
where new settlements were being established. It may in origin
have been a fiscal measure but in effect became the means of
controlling the peasantry. The apparent increase in debt bondage
and the fear of peasant migration would point to this being one of
the functions of the large-scale grants. That the possibility of
peasant migration to alleviate discontent was being slowly stifled
is suggested by the fact of peasants taking to revolt as well from
the early second millennium onwards.38 A rise in brigandage may
well have been a possibility for this period.39 A qualitative change
occurs when the state begins to grant villages or substantial acre­
ages of land already under cultivation; a change which reflects
both on the economy and on the nature of the state.
The need to fetter the peasantry would seem an evident depar­
ture from the earlier system and this in turn introduced a change
in the relationship between the cultivator and the land now riveted
in legalities and liabilities, with tax or rent no longer being the sole
criterion of a peasant economy. The Jcar§aJca of this period found
himself in a different situation from the kassaka of earlier times.
The term 'peasant7 therefore cannot have a blanket usage or mean­
ing since the variations within it have to be distinguished.
The secular grantees were part of a hierarchical system in
which they mirrored the court at the local level. This is evident
from their attempts to imitate the courtly style as depicted in the
art and literature of the time. Grants of land to the brahmanas as
Instances of such revolts are mentioned in R.S. Sharma, Indian Feudalism
(Delhi, 1980), pp. 127,220; cf. N. Karashima, South Indian History and Society
(New Delhi, 1984). Prior to this the more common form of protest was
peasant migration which is referred to in the Jataka literature and which is
held out as a threat to a king who demands excessive taxes. Romila Thapar,
'Dissent and Protest in the Early Indian Tradition/ Studies in History, 1979,
I. No. Z p. 189ff.
39 The increasing frequency in hero-stones commemorating a heroic act
in defence of a village would point to uncertain conditions in certain areas.
These tend to be in the interstices between kingdoms and between settled
and forested areas. Romila Thapar, T)eath and the Hero/ in S.C. Humphreys
and H. King, eds., Mortality and Immortality (London, 1981).
132 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
the major religious grantees rehabilitated them to a position of
authority and their anguished invocation of Kalki as a millennial
figure becomes less urgent.40 A new religious ideology gained
popularity focusing on the image and the temple and asserting an
assimilative quality involving the cults and rituals of Puranic
Hinduism and the genesis of the bhakti tradition. Ideological as­
similation is called for when there is a need to knit together socially
diverse groups. It is also crucial when there is an increase in the
distancing between such groups as well as the power of some over
others and the economic disparity between them. The significance
of these new cults and sects may lie in part in the focus on loyalty
to a deity which has parallel to the lQyalty of peasants and others
to an overlord. But it would be worth examining the rudiments of
each sect in its regional dimension, its grouping towards a jati
status and the use of an ostensibly cultural and religious idiom to
express a new social identity. Were these also mechanisms for
legitimizing territorial identities drawing on sacred geography
and pilgrimage routes with the temple as the focal point?41 The
egalitarian emphases of the devotees in the eyes of the deity has
rightly been viewed as the assertion of those lower down the social
scale in favour of a more egalitarian society. But its significance
grows when the social background to this belief is one of increas­
ing disparity. Movements of dissent which had religious forms
were often gradually accommodated and their radical content
slowly diluted. The move away from community participation in
a ritual to a personalized and private worship encourages the
notion of individual freedom, even if it is only at the ideological
level.
In the justifiable emphasis on social and economic history
there has been too frequently a neglect among historians of the
40 Vi$nu Parana IV. 24; Mahabhinvta, ¿Snti Parvan, 254.39ff.
41 This appears to have become important in a later period judging from
the JagannStha cult at Puri and the VithobS cult at Pandarpur. H. Kulke,
Jagannatha-kult und Gajapati Konigtum (Weisbaden, 1979); G.A. Deleury, The
Cult of Vithoba (Poona, 1960).
EARLY INDIA: AN OVERVIEW 133
analysis of ideology. To study ideology without its historical
context is to practice historical hydroponics, for ideas and beliefs
strike roots in the humus of historical reality. To restrict the study
of a society to its narrowly social and economic forms alone is to
see it in a limited two-dimensional profile. The interaction of
society and ideology takes a varied pattern and to insist always on
the primacy of the one over the other is to deny the richness of a
full-bodied historical explanation.
Ideas are sometimes analysed as a response to social pressures
and needs. This is particularly pertinent for those dealing with
social history. Some of the more important literature is suffused
with a theoretical representation of society even in symbolic or
ideational forms. Meanings very often do not stem from just the
vocabulary but require familiarity with the cultural context of the
word. Examples of this would be the levels of meaning of words
such as varna and jati as they travel through time in texts such as
the Dharmakastras. The ideological layers in the latter as codes of
behaviour have to be peeled in order to obtain a better comprehen­
sion of their ordering of society.
Central to any concern with ideology in the ancient past is the
critique of religious thought (as distinct from religious practice or
organization). Some analyses of the Upanisads for instance, can
provide an interesting example of this. One of the major strands
in Upanisadic thought is said to be a secret doctrine known only
to a few ksatriyas who teach it to select, trusted brahmanas.42 Even
the most learned among the latter, the mahdbdla mahahrotriya, are
described as going to the ksatriyas for instruction.43 The doctrine
involves the idea of the soul, the atman and its ultimate merging
with the brahman as well as metempsychosis or the transmigration
of the soul: in fact a fundamental doctrine of this age which was to
have far-reaching consequences on Indian society. That it should
have been secret and originally associated with the ksatriyas raises
42 S. Radhakrishnan, The Principal Upanisads (London, 1953). Introduction.
43 Chandogya Upanisad, V. 11.Iff.
134 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
many questions, some of which have been discussed by scholars.44
It is true that the brahmanas and the ksatriyas were both members
of the 'leisured classes' in Vedic society and could therefore in­
dulge in idealistic philosophy and discourse on the niceties of life
after death. But this is only a partial answer and much more
remains to be explained. Was the ritual of sacrifice so deeply
imprinted on the brahmana mind and so necessary to the profession
at this point that it required non-brahmanas to introduce alterna­
tives to’salvation, other than the sacrificial ritual? The adoption of
meditation and theories of transmigration had the advantage of
releasing the ksatriyas from the pressures of a prestation economy
and permitting them to accumulate wealth, power and leisure.
Alternatively, was the accumulation of these already present in
the fringe areas, described as the mlecha-deba (impure lands) in
Vedic texts, where the sacrificial rituals for various reasons had
become less important? Thus Janaka of Mithila, A^vapati Kaikeya
and Ajata&atru of KSM could reflect on alternative ways to salva­
tion. This also places a different emphasis on the function of the
ksatrtya who had now ceased to be primarily a cattle-raiding,
warrior chief.
These are not the only kinds of connections relevant to a
history of the period. Upper and lower groups or even classes
treated as monolithic, belie social reality. The tensions within these
should also be noticed where the evidence suggests this. The
competition for status between brahmanas and ksatriyas and the
separation of their functions, as well as their mutual dependence,
is symbolized in the sacrificial ritual which becomes a key articula­
tion of the relationship. The new belief was the reversal of the
sacrificial ritual in that it required neither priests nor deities but
only self-disdpline and meditation. At another level, the trans­
migrating of the soul through the natural elements and plants to
44 P. Deussen, The Philosophy of the Upanisads (Edinburgh, 1906), p. 17ff;
A.B. Keith, Religion and Philosophy of the Vedas (HOS, 1925), p. 495ff; D.P.
Chattopadhyaya, Indian Philosophy (New Delhi, 1964), p. 85ff.
EARLY INDIA: AN OVERVIEW 135
its ultimate rebirth, carries an echo of shamanism which may have
remained popular outside priestly ritual.
There is in the new belief the first element of a shift from the
clan to the individual in as much as the sacrificial ritual involves
the clan but meditation and self-discipline, perhaps in opposition
to the dan, involves only the individuaL It symbolizes the break­
ing away of the individual from the dan. It also introduces an
element of anomie which becomes more apparent in the later
development of these beliefs by various sects. These reflections
were seminal to what became a major direction in Indian thought
and action, the opting out of the individual from society and where
renunciation is a method of self-discovery but can also carry a
message of dissent.49 That the new ideas were attributed to the
ksatriyas and yet induded in a brahmanical text was probably
because for the brahmanas to author a doctrine openly questioning
the sacrificial ritual would, at this stage, have been an anomaly.
That the doctrine stimulated philosophical discussion would in
itself have required that it be recorded. But its indusion may also
partially have been motivated by the fact that when the doctrine
was appropriated by heterodox teachers such as the Buddha, it
could be maintained that even the roots of heterodoxy stemmed
from the Vedic tradition. This was to become yet another techni­
que by which orthodox theory in subsequent centuries sought to
disguise ideas contradicting its own position. The Buddha not
only democratized the doctrine46 but also nurtured the idea of
karma and samsara and related it, among other things, to social
inequities. But his negation of the soul (atman) introduces a con­
tradiction of the doctrine as visualized in the Upanisads. Such
theoretical contradictions were current at this time.47 The positing
of a thesis and an anti-thesis becomes a characteristic feature of
45 Romila Thapar, 'Renunciation: the making of a Counter-Culture?'
Ancient Indian Social History: Some Interpretations, p. 63ff.
46 S. Radhakrishnan, op. at.
47 K.N. Jayatilleke, The Buddhist Theory of Knowledge (London, 1963),
p. 49ff.
136 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
philosophical debate and is reflected both in empirical disciplines
such as grammar as well as in more abstract analysis.48
The relating of ideology to historical reality can result not only
in new ways of examining a historical situation and be used to
extend or modify the analysis from other sources but can also help
in confirming the reality as derived from other sources. (It might
also stir the still waters of contemporary interpretations of early
Indian thought). Such a study, incorporating elements of decon­
struction, would sharpen the awareness of concepts and theoreti­
cal frameworks. Historical explanation then becomes an enter­
prise in which the refinements of concepts and theories are a
constant necessity, not only because of the availability of fresh
evidence from new sources but also because of greater precision
in our understanding of the categories which we use to analyse
these sources. It is a bi-focal situation where the frame of reference
provided by the analysis of ideology remains the distant view
while the historian's use of a theoretical explanation of the data
indicates the nearer reading.
48 S.D. Joshi (ed.) Patarijali's Vyakartma MahSbhasya (Poona, 1968), pp. i-
xiv. At the more abstract level it is evident in the Brahma|9lasutta in the
Digha Ntkifya 1.1. The method of purvapak&uttarvpaksa-suMhSnta, although
reminiscent of Hegel's dialectic should not be taken as an equivalent as it
appears to have been limited to categories of logical analysis.
Society and Historical
Consciousness:
The Itihäsa-pumna
Tradition
The expression of historical consciousness, it has often been
assumed, takes the form of historical writing, dearly recog­
nizable as a genre of literature. More frequently, however, the
geological analogy of a particular vein embedded in rock seems
more apposite, in that such consciousness is not always visible and
has to be prised from sources which tend to conceal it. Within the
vein lies information purporting to relate to events of the past, and
enveloping this vein is the commentary which arises from con­
cerns of the present. The form it takes tends to reflect the kind of
society from which it emanates.
Historical consciousness, therefore, can change over time.
Historians tend to view historical writing as conforming almost
entirely to the format and pattern familiar from the last couple of
centuries, or from models borrowed from particular societies such
as ancient Greece and China. The more important but neglected
aspect is the search for historical consciousness, irrespective of
how immediately recognizable or evident it may be, in its literary
form. This perhaps requires a distinction between what might be
termed 'embedded history'—forms in which historical conscious-
* I am grateful to my colleagues Satish Saberwal and 6.D. Chattopadhyaya
for comments on an eaviier draft of this essay.
138 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
ness has to be prised out—and its opposite, 'externalized his­
tory'—which tends to bring embedded consciousness into the
open, as it were, and to be more aware of its deliberate use of the
past. The need for such a deliberate use suggests a changed his­
torical situation. This distinction can be apparent not only between
societies but also within the same society as it undergoes change.
The attempt in this essay is not to analyse historical consciousness
in relation to society as a whole, but in relation to a more restricted
view of its expression among those who successfully aspired to
power. It relates therefore only to changing forms in the percep­
tion of power.
Each version of the past which has been deliberately trans­
mitted has a significance for the present, and this accounts for its
legitimacy and its continuity. The record may be one in which
historical consciousness is embedded: myth, epic and genealogy;
or alternatively it may refer to the more externalized forms: chron­
icles of families, institutions and regions, and biographies of per­
sons in authority. There is no evolutionary or determined
continuum from one form to the other and facets of the embedded
consciousness can be seen as a part of the latter, whether intro­
duced deliberately or subconsciously. The degree to which forms
change or overlap has a bearing on dominant social formations.
Similarly, major social and political changes influence the form of
historical consciousness even though there is no mechanical cor­
relation between the two.
Evident historical texts such as chronicles of families, institu­
tions and regions often incorporate mythical beginnings which act
as charters of validation. The tracing of links with established
lineages through genealogical connections, and frequently with
epic heroes, plays the same role of drawing upon embedded
history. I shall consider some forms of embedded history, such as
the prevalent myths in the itihâsa-purâna tradition, which encap­
sulate features of what might be seen as historical experience; the
eulogies and hero-lauds which were gradually expanded into epic
literature; the genealogical sections or vambSnuatrita of the Puranic
SOCIETY AND HISTORICAL CONSCIOUSNESS 139
texts which, by implication, carry a commentary on the social
status of ruling families.
In contrast to these the more externalized forms draw upon
the embedded but have other primary concerns and carry a dif­
ferent type of historical information. Thus historical biography or
the carita literature has as its germ the hero-laud and the epic hero.
Family chronicles and vambavalis assimilate myth and genealogy
to other events. Chronicles of institutions and regions maintain a
variant form of mythology and genealogy, and are aimed at re­
cording the history of the institution or the area. The distinction
made between the two forms is not arbitrary; I am arguing that the
embedded form is closer to what have been called lineage-based
societies and the externalized form to state systems incorporated
in monarchies. Or, to put it in another way, the existence of the
state requiring its own validation encourages the creation of an
externalized historical consciousness.
In the articulation of historical consciousness in early north-
Indian society the truly embedded forms are evident in the litera­
ture of the lineage-based society characterized by an absence of
state formation, and the more free-standing or externalized forms
emerge with the transition to state systems. The terms 'lineage
society7 and 'state systems', used here as a short-hand, represent
not merely a change in political forms but in the totality of a
society. Thus the term 'state' would refer to a society registering
political polarities, an increasingly vertical hierarchy of authority,
social inequalities, differentiated economies and distinct ideologi­
cal identities; not that these characteristics are completely absent
in lineage societies, but there are endemic differences between the
two. Sometimes these differences are blurred in the texts. Lineage
society derives its validity from different sources of authority as
compared to state systems, with which we are in any case more
familiar.1 The central role of lineage in the earlier society has
11 have discussed these differences as they pertain to early Indian sodety,
specifically to Vedic and post-Vedic times prior to the rise of the Mauryan
state, in From Lineage to State (Delhi, 1984). The term lineage' is used in
140 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
reference to more than just the ordering of kinship for it dominates
virtually every aspect of activity.
I
The deepest layer of the embedded form is myth. Events are
assumed to have happened, and time is almost proto-chronos
since it involves gods and the supernatural in an active role with
humans and animals. The significance of myth to the historian lies
more in its being the self-image of a given culture, expressing its
social assumptions. The role of myth in this context is often ex­
planatory. Origin myths are concerned with cosmogony and the
start of events such as the Flood myth.2 The Satapatha Brahmana
version of the Flood myth carries obvious traces of association
with the Sumerian Flood myth. Manu, when performing his morn­
ing ablutions, finds a fish in his cupped hands and rears the fish
until it reaches an enormous size. The fish explains the intention
of the gods to drown the earth in a deluge and, wishing to save
Manu and the seven rsis (in whom vests all knowledge) from this
disaster, it orders Manu to build a boat for this purpose. This is
tied to its horn and it swims through the deluge. The boat and its
passengers remain safely on a mountain until the flood subsides,
after which they return. By means of sacrifical rites Manu creates
a series of sons for himself and one androgynous daughter, his
children being the founders of the various lineages. The eldest son,
Iksváku, establishes the Süryavariiéa or Solar lineage, and the
androgynous daughter, Da, establishes the Candravamfea or Lunar
lineage.
preference to the more commonly employed term 'tribe', as lineage is central
to such societies, is more precise and points to the crux of such societies
where descent and birth are in fact the major focus of social ordering.
2 ^atapatha Brahmana 1.8.1.1-10; MahabhSrata, Sabhaparvan, 185; Matsya
Purina LI 1-34; Rovnila Thapar, 'Puranic Lineages and Archaeological Cul­
tures,' in Ancient Indian Social History: Some Interpretations (New Delhi, 1978)
(hereafter referred to as AISH), p. 240ff.
SOCIETY AND HISTORICAL CONSCIOUSNESS 141
The Matsya Purâna version links the fish with the incarnation
of Visnu, thus bringing the gods more directly into the story/ and
at the same time using what was obviously a familiar myth to
demonstrate the power of the new god, Visnu. Manu, as the name
suggests in its association with mànava (mankind), is the primeval,
archetypal man who is the eponymous ancestor of all the lineages.
The emphasis on origins is again stressed in the deluge, where the
flood is seen as a time-marker. Floods tend to wipe away earlier
conditions and society can start afresh.3 The survival of Manu and
the rsis links the new creation with the old, in spite of the deluge
washing away the old, since Manu is the seventh in a succession
of pre-Flood Manus. The link is important to the genealogical
records. The status of the earlier Manus is conveyed through it to
the new lineages. AU the eponymous ancestors of the lineages are
the children of Manu.
Other myths provide social sanctions, one such being the
Purusasükta story in the Rg Veda describing the origin of the four
castes.4 The Purusasükta hymn occurs in a late section of the Rg
Veda and describes the sacrifice of the god Prajâpati, from whose
body the four zxarnas are said to have sprung: the brdhmanas from
his mouth, the ksatriyas from his arms, the vaifyas from his thighs
and the kudras from his feet. The symbolism of each bodily part
relates to the ritual status and function of the particular varna. That
the origin and hierarchy go back to a ritual occasion underlines
the nature of the ranking. The evolution of varna stratification is
rooted in the lineage-based society of Vedic times. In a sense the
brâhmana and the ksatriya varnas were to evolve as distinct lineages
with their separate rules of marriage and descent: exogamy in the
brâhmana gotras and the more frequent endogamy of the ksatriyas.
The küdra varna is excluded by its very origin, which is a denial of
lineage since it is said more often to include groups identified by
the status of the two parents.
3 M. Eliade, The Myth of the Eternal Return (Princeton, 1971).
4 Rg Veda, x. 97.
142 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
Some myths legitimize a changed social and political condi­
tion, as is apparent from the much repeated story of Prthu.5 The
various versions of this story begin by referring to the wickedness
of Vena who had to be killed by the rsis because of his unrighteous
rule. From his left thigh they churned a successor, Ni§ada, who
was inadequate and was expelled to the forest as a hunter-
gatherer. From the right arm of Vena they churned another suc­
cessor, the righteous raja Prthu, who introduced cattle-keeping
and agriculture and bestowed so many benefits on the earth,
PrthvI, that she in gratitude gave him her name. Vena was wicked
because he ceased to perform the sacrificial ritual and had to be
killed by the rsis (and not expelled by his subjects), who alone had
the right to depose a ruler. The dark, short, ugly Ni§3da became
the prototype of all forest-dwelling people. The myth sought to
legitimize the expulsion of such groups when land was cleared
and settled by agriculturists.
In each of such cases an attempt is made to explain social
origins and assumptions which are significant to historical re­
construction. Myth was transmitted orally in its earliest phase.
With the evolution of a more heterogeneous and stratified society,
myths were questioned and explanations sought. Some myths
were replaced with new or different versions and others added to
and embellished, often to such a degree that the original myth
became almost opaque. That myths in some ways mirrored society
was not their sole function, but for our purposes this aspect is
significant.
Myths of descent often serve to integrate diverse groups by
providing common origins. Among competing groups a myth
can be used for the reverse process of distinguishing one from
the other. Origin myths posit beginnings authoritatively and are
therefore central to embedded history. The degree to which myths
reflect different social assumptions can be demonstrated by a
comparison of origin myths from the Rg Veda and from Buddhist
* MahabhSrata, ¿Sntiparvan, 59: Visnu PurSna, 1.13; Matsya Purina, x.4-10.
SOCIETY AND HISTORICAL CONSCIOUSNESS 143
sources, a comparison which also demonstrates the degree to
which historical consciousness is embedded in myth.6 The origins
of the ¿akyas, Licchavis, Mallas and Koliyas are all described in
stories which have a common format, which format suggests a
tradition deviant from thebrahmanical origin myths. The clans are
of the Iksv&u lineage, are said to be of the families of rajas (which
could mean royal descent but more likely refers to families of
lineage chiefs) and are often the exiled children of such families,
thus suggesting a lineage migration or fission. The new settlement
is in a forest clearing with a town as its nucleus. The name of the
lineage is frequently associated with an object such as the kol or
baka tree. More interestingly, the original founders have a system
of sibling marriages and in each case sixteen pairs of twin children
are bom: it is from these that the lineage expands. Sibling incest,
since it is never actually referred to as prevalent, would point to a
symbolic concern with purity of lineage, a demarcation between
the families of the rajas who owned land and the rest of the people,
by the assertion of origins otherwise taboo; or perhaps an endor­
sement of cross-cousin marriage, which, because it was prohibited
by brahma nical codes referring to northern India, may have been
seen as a form of sibling incest. That the origin myth was of some
consequence is evident from its inclusion in the history of every
lineage and by the considerable emphasis given to it in the bio­
graphies of the Buddha. There is an absence of any reference to
ritual status.
n
Apart from myth, other embedded forms are associated with
various fragments of literature moving towards the emergence of
the epic. The evolution is traceable via the dam-stuti (eulogies on
6 Sutta NipSta, 420ff; Suita Nipata Commentary, I.352ff; SumahgakuilSsim, I,
pp. 258-60; Romila Thapar, 'Origin Myths and the Historical Tradition/
AISH, p. 294ff.
144 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
gift-giving), gatha, narakamsi (eulogies on heroes) to the akhyana
and the kathd (cycles of stories generally involving heroes). The
dana-stuti hymns scattered throughout the Kg Veda are eulogies on
chiefs and deities who act as would chiefs bestowing generous
gifts on grateful bards and priests.7 The prototype of the gift-giver
was the god Indra. The lndia-gathas express the gratitude of the
jana (tribe) whom he has led successfully in a cattle-raid and
subsequently in distributing the wealth bestowed, much of it on
the priests. The same was expected from the ideal raja (chief) in a
society where raids were a major access to property and where
wealth was computed in heads of cattle and horse, in chariots, gold
and slave girls. The dana-stutis mentioned the names of their
patrons, who were doubtless actual chiefs, but, equally important,
the hymns indicated the purpose of the gift and the items of
wealth. They were not only eulogies of past actions but also
indicators of what was expected from the chiefs.
The akhyanas, commemorating rajSs and heroes, were the
cycles of stories recited at the time of the yajnas (sacrificial rituals).6
Some heroes underwent a metamorphosis in time and came to be
remembered for reasons quite different from those of the earliest
stories. Thus Pururavas in the Rg Veda is a mortal who loves a
celestial woman, Urva§i; in the Satapatha Brahmana he is shown as
aspiring to become a celestial being himself in pursuit of his love;
and finally in the Mahabharata he is not only a celestial being but
is among the more important ancestors of the Candravam^a line­
age.9 The protagonists in these stories are members of the chiefly
families {rajanyas and ksatriyas); the stories narrate their lives and
activities and incidentally provide information on the lineages as
7 Rg Veda, VI. 63; V. 27; V. 30; VI. 47; VIII. 1; Vni. 5; Vffl.6.
8 Both the terms akhyana and kathd have the meaning of recitation or oral
narration, and the purpose of the form is dear from these words. Some of
the bardic fragments in the form of stories are also to be found in the jStaka
literature.
9 Rg Veda, X. 95; Satapatha Brahmana, XI. S.l.lff; Mahabharata, Adiparvan,
vn. 70-71.
SOCIETY AND HISTORICAL CONSCIOUSNESS 145
well. An example of the latter is the transformation of single
lineages into confederacies of trikes—the Bharatas and the Purus
of the Rg Veda confederating with others into the Kurus of later
times. The genealogies tend to be shallow and activities centre
around the lineages rather than the succession of hereditary status.
A common feature of these many embedded forms is that they
are linked to the ritual of sacrifice, the yajna. This imparts sanctity
to the story and ensures it a continuity coeval with the perfor­
mance of the ritual; it also imbues it with what were believed to
be transcendental powers associated with the accurate and precise
performance of the ritual. Even if the events were limited to the
activities of the ksatriyas, the audience was much wider and incor­
porated the entire tribe. Apart from the obvious ritual and re­
ligious function of the yajna its relevance also lay in its being the
occasion for the redistribution of wealth, both from cattle raids and
from agricultural production. Up to a point certain rituals had
elements of a potlatch in which wealth was not merely redistri­
buted but was also consumed. Both the redistribution as well as
the destruction of wealth were directly concerned with claims to
status.10. When the ritual was enlarged to include representation
from other jams, either in the form of honoured guestsor as tribute
bearers, its function as a potlatch gradually gave way to its sym­
bolizing status on a grander scale. The claims ot individual line­
ages or their segments as descent groups could be established on
such occasions, as for example the famous ràjasùya sacrifice of
Yudhisthira11 which raises a complex set of problems concerning
the status of various lineages, not least among them that of Krsna
as the chief of ttar Vrsnis. The yajna therefore stated, as it were, the
ranking order of the lineages. The stories which related to these
lineages became social charters recording status vis-à-vis other
lineages, or changes of status, as for example from segment to
confederacy, or the migration and fissioning off of a segment from
10 Romila Thapar, 'DSna and daksina as forms of exchange/ in AISH,
p. lQSff,
11 Mohabhàrata, Sabhàparvan, 30ff; 34ff.
146 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
a lineage, as in the case of the Cedis migrating from the western
Ganga valley to central India.12 The record of such migrations was
crucial not only to territorial claims but also to genealogical links
with established lineages by those newly formed. The yajna was a
conduit of gift-exchange as well where the wealth of the lineage
brought as bati or tribute (initially voluntary and later less so) by
the vik (clan) to the ksatriya or the raja, or else the wealth captured
in a raid would be ceremonially used in the ritual and what
remained of it would be gifted to the brahmanas performing the
yajna. The exchange was at many levels. Wealth was offered to the
gods in return for the success and well-being both of the ksatriya
and the vik, the well being guaranteed by the brahmanas. Tangible
wealth moved from the household of the ksatriya to that of the
brahmana. Such a limited exchange was economically non-produc­
tive in the sense that it was self-perpetuating with little chance of
breaking through to new sodal forms. But its actual significance
lay in its being the operative process in maintaining the lineage
society.
Ill
It was doubtless these fragments of eulogies (pn&xsffs) on the
heroes and the cycles of stories which led to the first groping?
towards epic forms in India, referred to as the kathâ. Both the
Mahâbhârata and the Râmâyana had their earlier and perhaps more
truly epic versions in what have been referred to as the Rama-
kathâ and the Bhârata13 or Jaya. In their later forms, as we have them
m
12 Mahabhûrata, Àdiparvan, 57.
13 V.S. Sukthankar, On the Meaning of the Mahabharata (Bombay, 1957);
'Epic Studies/ ABORI, XVIII, pp. 1-76; C. Bulke, Râma-kathâ (Allahabad,
1972); H. Jacobi, The Ramayam (trans. S.N. Ghoshal), (Baroda, 1960). It is a
moot question as to how much of the original epic persists in the now heavily
inflated and interpolated versions, which, despite the critical editions of both
texts, still require substantial pruning to be brought anywhere near the
original. The interpolations have been both of substance and form: hence the
SOCIETY AND HISTORICAL CONSCIOUSNESS 147
now, each of the two epics has a distinct locale and the narrative
is woven around one of the two main lineages. Thus the Maha-
bharata focuses on the western Ganga valley, referred to as mad-
hya-deka in the literature, and is concerned with the Aila lineage.
The Ramayana as the epic of the Iksviku lineage has its nucleus in
the middle Ganga valley, in Kofcala and Videha, and is concerned
with migrations southwards into the Vindhyan region, with Dak-
sina Ko&la perhaps providing the clue to the area of exile.
The epic continued to be recited, initially on ritual occasions;
the Mahabharata is said to have been recited at the yajna in the
Naimi&a forest and the sarpa-yajna of Janamejaya, the Ramayana by
Lava and Kufca in the Valmflti-¿¿rama. But it also became the stock
for court poetry, the kavya, in the newly emerging courts of the
monarchies of the late first millennium BC, or for that matter in
more elaborate literary fashions in the courts of the various king­
doms of the first millennium AD.
The epic form carries within it the germs of a more conscious
and less embedded historical tradition.14 Its historicity lies in the
fact that it is a later age reflecting on an earlier one, the reflections
frequendy taking the form of interpolations interleaved among the
reference to the Ramayana as a kavya or literary poem and to the Maha­
bharata as itihSsa, more dosely approximating history, although the historical
content remains internalized.
14 This is in part reflected in the perennial search by archeologists for'epic
ages'. The financially flourishing 'Ramayana archaeology^ even though
without any tangible results, continues to be discussed seriously in some
archaeological and historical circles, despite the near absurdity of the idea.
That epic archaeology is an almost non-existent category becomes dear from
a discussion of the encrustations which go into the making of an epic. E.W.
Hopkins, The Great Epic of India: Its Character and Origin (New York, 1901);
V.S. Sukthankar, Prolegomena to the Critical Edition of Adi Parvan (Poona,
1933); Romila Thapar, Exile and the Kingdom: Some Thoughts on the
Ramayana (Bangalore, 1978); 'The Historian and the Epic/ Annals of the
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1979, vol. LX, pp. 199-213; B.D. Chat-
topadhyaya, 'Indian Archaeology and the Epic Tradition/ Puratattva, Vm,
1975-6, pp. 67-71.
148 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
fragments of the oral, bardic tradition. When epic literature ceases
to be a part of the oral tradition and is frozen into a written form,
reflections begin to tail off. The pastoral-agricultural society of the
world of the heroes structured around lineage gives way to the
more clearly agrarian societies and to the rise of urban centres
controlled by what is visibly emerging as a state system—which
in the Ganga valley at this time was mainly monarchical.
Many of the seeming contradictions in the stances and con­
figurations characterizing the epics can perhaps be explained by
these texts (and particularly the Mahâbhàrata), reflecting some­
thing of a transitional condition between two rather different
structures, the societies of the lineage-based system and that of the
monarchical state. Idealized characters are seldom the gods but
rather the heroes who occupy the centre of the stage and the gods
remain in the wings. Sometimes the earlier deities even come in
for a drubbing.15 The importance of the heroes is further endorsed
by their being almost the terminal descendants in the major line­
ages of the past, a matter of some despair for their death is seen as
the wrapping up and putting away of the lineage society, which,
in certain areas, was being replaced by monarchies. However,
some elements of the lineage society did persist and among them
was the continuation of varna ranking. In many areas outside the
madhya-deba, lineage society continued for longer periods and the
transition to monarchical states was a gradual process. Neverthe­
less the change to monarchy meant a substantial alteration of
social configurations.
Unlike myth, epic does not attempt to explain the universe or
society. It is sufficient that the problems of society are laid bare,
and even solutions are not sought since the ultimate solution is the
15 The treatment of Indra in the epics, for example, records a sea change
from the Indra-gàtàôs of the Rg Veda. Indra is now subservient not only to
the rising status of Viçnu but is unequal even to the superior power of the
rets. Leaving aside the deliberate incarnating of Visnu as the epic heroes
Râma and Krçna, there is little doubt that the heroes are now more central
than the older gods.
SOCIETY AND HISTORICAL CONSCIOUSNESS 149
dissolution of the system. Societies experiencing greater stratifica­
tion require an overall authority to maintain the cohesion of line­
age and strata. When such an authority comes into being and is
eulogized,, that eulogy becomes the dirge of a truly epic society. In
laying bare the conditions in the transition from lineage society to
state systems, a number of bi-polarities are reflected in the litera­
ture which give an added edge to the image of the past and the
contours of the present. Thus grama (settlement) is contrasted with
aranya (forest), the kingdom with exile; the orderliness of the
grama is opposed to the disorder of the aranya; the kingly ethic
arises out of governing a people and claiming land, the heroic ethic
emerges from war and confrontation. The monarchical state is
seen as the superior and is the successor to lineage society, ir­
respective of whether this is clearly spelt out—as in the conflict
between the kingdom of Kofeala and the raksasas in the Ramayana—
or whether it is left more ambiguous—as in the diverse assump­
tions of the narrative and didactic sections of the MahabhSrata
where the Sabhaparvan, encapsulating the essence of a lineage
society, stands in contrast to the ¿antiparvan with its rhetoric on
the monarchical state. The new ethic is sustained in part by the
popularizing of new sources of authority. Among them and sig­
nificant to the political arena were the king, the brahmana and the
rsi. None of these were entirely new in that the chief, the priest and
the shaman were dominant figures in lineage society. But it is the
tangible authority of the king based on land as the source of
revenue, or of the brahmana as the sole performer of and manual
on rituals, and of the rsi and samnyasi as symbolizing an intangible
moral authority almost as a counterweight to that of the first two,
which gives a fresh dimension to their role and their interrelations.
The changed situation is reflected in a shift in the kind of au thority
exercised. From a more diffused, equitable authority there is a
movement towards a hierarchical, vertical authority.16 This was
16 Cf. W.B. Miller, 'Two Concepts of Authority/ American Anthropologist,
April 1955, vol. 57, pp. 271-89.
150 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
mitigated somewhat by the countervailing presence of the renoun-
cer and the charisma attached to renunciation.
The epic as the literature of one age looking back nostalgically
on another can become a literature of legitimation. Interpolations
are often the legitimation of the present but are attributed to the
heroes of the past. The bards were perhaps providing the models
of what patrons should be like. But, more important, it is the
kingdoms looking back on an age of chiefships: where recently
founded dynasties were seeking ancestry from the ksatriya line­
ages through actual or, more often, imagined genealogical links;
where such ancestry would also bestow social legitimacy and
validate kingship. That legitimacy and validation are essential to
the epic is clear from the central event of the narrative, namely the
legitimacy of succession, involving elder and younger sons and
the problems of disqualification.17 Legitimacy also relates to using
the past to explain the present. Perhaps the most dramatic example
of this is the series of explanations in favour of accepting the
strangeness of Draupadl marrying five brothers, fraternal poly­
andry not being a commonly practised form of marriage. Among
the explanations is predictably a reference to an earlier birth of
Draupadi.18 Fortunately the doctrine of transmigration, referring
to events and situations in a previous birth, makes the use of the
past more plausible. The interplay of the past and the present is
| thus not only part of the implicit epic idiom but is made more
explicit by recourse to the theory of transmigration. At another
17 J.A.B. van Buitenan refers to the problem of the 'disqualified eldest' in
his introduction to the translation of the Adiparvan. The Mahabhantta. The
Book of the Beginning (Chicago, 1973), p. xviii. The problem goes back to earlier
antecedents. Thus the Candravam&a lineage starts with the replacement of
Yadu, the eldest son of Yay5ti, by his youngest son, Puru. The Mah&harata
war, which involves virtually all the ksatriya lineages and becomes the last
heroic act of a lineage sodety, is again motivated by the problem of succession
where physical ailments further complicate the question. The exile of RSma
is over the issue of succession, which, in spite of the heavier emphasis on
primogeniture, is still subject to the whims and wishes of the parents.
18 Mahabharata, Adiparvan, 189.
SOCIETY AND HISTORICAL CONSCIOUSNESS 151
level the past validates the present in the long discourses on what
constitutes good government or the correct functioning of the
ksatriya as king: perhaps best exemplified in the dying Bhisma
delivering the lengthy moksadharma perorations, lying on his bed
of arrows. Legitimacy makes the claim to historicity more feasible
and the association with myth is weakened.19
IV
The gradual prising of historical consciousness becomes visible in
the compilation of what came to be called the itihasa-purana.70 The
phrase remains difficult to define, veering between the perceived
past and historicity. It is described as the fifth Veda but was an
oral tradition for many centuries until it was compiled in the form
of the Puranas in the mid first millennium AD. The genealogical
sections of the Puranas were a reordering of the earlier material in
a new format. The lesser and multiple Puranas borrowed the
format of the earlier major Puranas, although their contents dif­
fered. The PurSna was to become a recognized literary form. To the
extent that it recorded history, it was initially transitional from
embedded to externalized history. It was linked to the bardic
tradition, where the suta and the magadha are said to have been its
earliest authors.21 In the Vedic texts the suta has a close relation
with the raja and was of high status, but by the time of the Manu
Dharmahastra the suta had been reduced to the level of a sanktrna-
19 Romila Thapar, The Ramayana: Theme and Variation/ in S.N. Mukher-
jee, ed., India: History and Thought (Calcutta, 1982), pp. 221-53.
20 The itihasa-purdm is referred to in theArtha$5stra, 1.5. Its literal meaning
is 'thus it was'—iti-hi-asa. The events of the past were to be so related as to
link them with the goals and purposes of the brahmanical tradition.
21 The suta and the magadha are Mid to have arisen from the sacrifice of
Prthu, and immediately on appearing began a pn&asti of the rSja. Athanxmeda,
v.3.5.7; Taxttiriya BrShmana, 0.4.1. In texts such as Gautama, IV.15; Manu, X.ll,
26; NSrada, 110, the status of the suta has changed. This change is made
explicit in the MahdbhSrata, Adiparvan, 122.4ff. and 126.15#., in which the
sGta is inferior to the ksatriya.
152 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
jati or mixed caste. Doubtless by now the tradition had been
appropriated by the literate brahmanas who had also seen the
potential value of controlling oral information on the past and
recording it in a literary form relevant to emergent contemporary
requirements.
There is evidence to suggest that the Puranic texts were trans­
lated from the oral Prakrit to the literate Sanskrit.22 The structure
of the Puranas was an attempt to provide an integrated world view
of the past and present, linking events to the emergence of a deity
or a sect, since each Purana was dedicated to such a one, the
Visnu Purana being regarded as the model. The historical epicentre
of the itihasa tradition was the vamhanucarita, which, as the name
suggests, was the genealogy of all the known lineages and dynas­
ties upto the mid-first millennium AD. It was not a parallel tradi­
tion to the earlier kathds and akhyanas since it incorporated many
of these forms of embedded history. The genealogical core pertain­
ing to those who were believed to have held power in the past was
carefully preserved after it had been worked out into a systematic
pattern. This was because it not only purported to record the past
but was also later to become essential to future claims to lineage
status/ and was therefore linked with historical writing. Evidently
there was a need for a recognizable historical tradition at this time.
In the transition from lineage to state, which was occurring in
many parts of north India, monarchy had emerged as the viable
political form.
The major dynasties recorded in the Puranas upto the mid-first
millennium AD start with descendants of recognized ksatriya line­
ages, but by the mid-first millennium BC begin to refer to families
of non-ksatriya origin. Some are specifically said to be kudras, such
as the Nandas and possibly the Mauryas. Others, judging by their
names, were brahmana, such as the ¿ungas and K&nvas. The lesser
dynasties dating to the early centuries AD are stated to be vratya-
dvija, Sudra and mleccha, and this is explained as the result of the
22 F.E. Pargiter, The Ancient Indian Historical Tradition (London, 1922),
p. 77t£, Dynasties of the Kali Age ..., 1913, reprint, (Delhi, 1975), p. 77ff.
SOCIETY AND HISTORICAL CONSCIOUSNESS 153
inevitable degeneration in the Kaliyuga of all norms. Successor
dynasties are frequently referred to as the bhrtyas or servants of
the previous ones, suggesting that the founders of dynasties may
often have been administrators high in the hierarchy of office who
overthrew weak kings. This may well account for the rise of
brahmana dynasties. The gradual increase in references to kudra
rulers would indicate that political power, although in theory
restricted to ksatriyas, was infact open to any varna. It required
force and administrative control to establish a dynasty. Claims to
territory were established through strength of arms. Legitimation
through brahmanical ritual was evidently not required since some
dynasties are described as not conforming to Vedic rites. This may
well have been due to the influence of Buddhism and Jainism at
this time. The Brahmanical refusal to bestow ksatriya status on such
families may have been in part due to their being patrons of
non-brahmanical religious sects. Buddhist and Jaina literature on
the other hand insists on the ksatriya status of some of these
dynasties. Thus the Mauryas are not only listed as ksatriyas but are
linked to the clan of the Buddha, the ¿Skyas, which would auto­
matically have related them to the prestigious Suryavamia as
well23 The absence of proper status in the brahmanical sources
did not detract from the importance of these families. If anything
it points to the relative independence of the state as a political form
from the clutches of traditional validation during this period. The
need for legitimation through lineage status was apparently not
required at this time.
The encroachment of foreign rulers in the post-Maury an per­
iod led to some indigenous families having to recede into the
background. Claims to power and to actual status were conceded
to the Indo-Greeks, ¿akas, Parthians and KusSnas, but claim to
varna status was denied them and they continued to be called
vratya-ksatriyas (degenerate), having no indigenous land-base in
the sub-continent nor being able to claim kinship links with earlier
23 MahSwtmsaHkS, p. 180ff.
154 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
established lineages.24 This was despite the fact that some among
them did claim ksatriya status in their own inscriptions.25 The lack
of genealogical connections was a form of exclusion, effective in a
society where ritual status still drew heavily on the values of a
lineage-based social organization and where genealogical links
had played a crucial role.
Although dynastic status was not confined to any particular
varna, those who succeeded to kingship from the mid-first millen­
nium AD onwards often observed the formality of claiming ksa­
triya status, or at least of participating in a common ksatriya past
as embodied in the itihasa-purana tradition. The question may well
be asked as to why such a practice becomes more necessary during
this period, and the answer covers a range of possibilities. The
making of land grants to brahrrumas and the consequent spread of
Sanskritic culture provides an obvious reason. But it would be as
well not to overlook the reality on the ground/ as it were, and
examine the actual process of state formation at a time when it
related to secondary (if not tertiary) states, or new states emerging
from association with established states. Land grants of a substan­
tial size to non-religious grantees would have provided the base
for the grantee establishing a network of political control over the
area through his lineage connections.26 The partial brahmana an­
cestry of some ruling families as given in their genealogies would
suggest that even brahmana grantees were not averse to participat­
ing in this process. Where unoccupied land was still available and
the migration of peasants feared, political control would be less
effective if dependent on force and more effective if drawing its
strength from legitimacy. The expression of power in the sense
of controlling resources and seeking compliance through per­
suasion, influence and support27 would be better achieved by
24 Visnw Purana, IV. 21-4: Man«, X. 43-5.
^ Epigraphia Indice, VIII, pp. 59,86; EJ. Rapson, ed., The Cambridge History
of India, vol. I, Ancient India (Cambridge, 1935), p. 577.
26 For a later period, cf. R.G. Fox, Kin, Clan, Raja and Rule (Berkeley, 1971).
27 Miller, op cit.
SOCIETY AND HISTORICAL CONSCIOUSNESS 155
legitimacy than by force. The legitimation of lineage origins there­
fore became a necessity.
The granting of land, apart from its other functions, served
also to incorporate areas under lineage systems into the society
dominated by the state. Lineage-based agrarian activity was as­
similated into the new economy and erstwhile clansmen or else
their chiefs were converted into tax-paying peasants. Lineage
traditions continued up to a point and could be adjusted to the
varna framework, which acted as a bridge between the earlier
society and its later form.
It would be worth investigating whether the process of state
formation in the late first millennium AD provided a different
emphasis from that of the earlier period. The overlap between
lineage and state continued, but the political form was perhaps not
so reliant on institutions of the state and included a more substan­
tial dependence on lineage. Would it then be correct to argue that
the post-Gupta state did not attempt to uproot the ksatriyas (to use
the phrase of the Puranas) and reduce the importance of lineage
societies, but rather that it attempted to encourage the emergence
of a new role for lineages through which it sought to extend its
control?
With the kaleidoscopic formation of states in the post-Gupta
period, new ruling families relied heavily on genealogical links,
fabricated genealogies providing them with claims to being fcsa-
trtyas: claims which were carefully stated in the then legal charters,
i.e. the inscriptions recording the grants of land by these families
to brahmanas and other grantees. Such claims became even more
crucial in a situation of competition for status by horizontal mar­
riage alliances among the /new/ ksatriyas. Matrimonial links sealed
the claims to status. Thus the possible tribal Gond and Bhil associa­
tions of the Candella and Guhilot ruling families did not eventual­
ly stand in the way of their claims to ksatriya status, which were
backed not merely by land-ownership but also by claims to gen­
ealogical links with the Candravam&a and the Süryavaméa: the
claim being recognized with marriage into other established
156 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
k$atriya families.28 The sixteenth century marriage of a Gond raja
into the Candella family is an interesting example of how the
system worked. The acceptance by other competing families of the
origin myth and of the genealogy of the family successfully in­
stalled in power was largely because political power was relatively
open and individual families were concerned with succeeding to
power, not with altering the framework within which status was
conferred. The narrowing down of legitimation to one family
meant that others could aspire to the same power in changed
circumstances.
The earlier states from the Maury an to the Kusána tended to
develop administrative structures in which local regions were left
relatively untampered as long as they provided the required rev­
enue.29 When revenue requirements became oppressive, peasants
could threaten to migrate from the state and establish new clear­
ings in the forest and on waste land. Migration was the alternative
to peasant revolt and kings are cautioned against oppressive taxes
lest peasants migrate. From the Gupta period onwards there was
a gradual and increasing tendency to intensify the revenue de­
mands and tie down the peasantry.30 The economic restructuring
of the local region was regarded as part of the state's legitimate
right to revenue. The ability of the peasant to migrate was ham­
pered, and even though there is little apparent evidence of peasant
28 J.N. A sopa, Origin of the Rajputs (Delhi, 1976).. pp. 102ff., 208ft J. Tod,
Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan, voL I, (London, I960), p. 173ff. Asopa
argues that 'Guhila' means a forest and that it is to be located in the area
between Guhila-bala and the Mahi river. See also B.D. Chattopadhyaya,
'Origin of the Rajput: The Political, Economic and Sodal Processes in Early
Medieval Rajasthan/ The Indian Historical Review, July, 1976, voL m, no. 1,
pp. 59-82 Claims to kfatriya status were also made by ruling families and
politically powerful groups in south India. Thus the Colas claimed to be
SQiyavamH thePSn^yas Candravam&i, and the vel chieftains sought YJdava
descent
29 Romila Thapar, 'The State as Empire/ in H. Claessen and P. Skalnik,
The Study of the State (The Hague, 1981)/ p. 409ff.
^ R.S. Sharma, Indian Feudalism (Delhi, 1980).
SOCIETY AND HISTORICAL CONSCIOUSNESS 157
revolts the earlier flexible relationship between peasants and the
state would have changed—with the intermediate grantees play­
ing the difficult role of keeping the peasants tied since it was not
only the revenue demands of the state but also their own revenue
rights which were at stake. This points towards an urgent need on
the part of grantees and landowners and clan chiefs, the potential
ruling families, to not only insist on their high status but to be able
to prove it whenever necessary. An emphasis on status, with the
insistence on service by the lower orders inherent in the formula­
tion of varna, became in some areas an adjunct to coercion by those
who had succeeded in rising to higher levels of political power.
The itihasa-purana tradition became one of the means of legitimiz­
ing status and the vambanucarita sections had to be carefully pre­
served.
Lists of succession (vamba)—whether of teachers as in the
Vedic texts, or of Elders in the sangha, or of descent groups as in
the case of the SGiyavam§a and the Candravam&a, or of dynas­
ties—encapsulate perceptions of the past. Genealogy as a record
of succession lay at the core of the epic tradition and linked epic
to embedded history as well as to the itihSsa-puram and later
historical forms. Genealogy is used by new groups in the ascen­
dant to legitimize their power and claim connections with those
who were earlier in power. Links were therefore sought in the
post-Gupta period by new ruling families with the Suryavam&a
and the Candravamia. The epics embodying the stories of these
lineages were thus assured continuity, quite apart from the in­
fusion of a religious dimension through the theory of epic heroes
being avataras of Visnu. The less obvious information from geneal­
ogical data indicates kinship patterns, marriage forms, geographi­
cal settlements and migration.31
The pattern or structure of a genealogy is often indicative of
social integration where competing groups are shown through a
31 Romila Thapar, 'Genealogy as a source of Sodal History/ AISH,
p. 326ff.
158 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
listing of descent. Among these the successful ones claim a larger
share of the genealogical structure, parallel to their claim to in­
heritance and power. In the Aila genealogy, for example, the Purus
and the YSdavas claim the major part of the genealogy and the
lines of Turvafea, Anu and Druhyu peter out fairly soon. The
ideological function of the genealogy is to legitimate those who
have succeeded to power or to subvert the claims of those who for
various reasons are unacceptable. That genealogy was of consid­
erable consequence is indicated not only by the Puranas but also
by other sources.32
The vamkanucarita section has three distinct constituent
parts.33 The first is the mythical section of the rule of the seven
Manus, which is wiped away by the action of the Flood. This is
followed by the detailed listing of the generations in each of the
two major lineages. The IksvSku is the senior and more cohesive.
Descent is recorded only from eldest son to eldest son with a tight
control over a well demarcated territory, indicative of a stronger
tendency towards monarchy and primogeniture. The Aila lineage
is more akin to the pattern of a segmentary system with a wide
geographical distribution involving northern, western and central
India. Possibly it reflects a more assimiliative system in which the
segments are less the result of branching off or migrating away
from the main lineage and more a record of alliances with existing
clans. The spread of the Haihaya group in central India would
suggest this. It might also be the result of an element of the 'tidying
up' of lineages by the authors of the Puranas. Two sub-lineages
32 Pliny in NaturtU History, VL 21.4-5, quotes Megathenes as stating that
the Indians count 154 kings upto the time of Alexander. Genealogical data
is also contained in the seals and in most land-grant inscriptions from the
Gupta period onwards, e.g. Sonpat Copper Seal of Harshavardhana, in J.F.
Fleet, ed., C./.7., vol. Ill, Inscriptions of the Early Gupta Kings (Varanasi,
1970), p. 231: Ralanpur Stone Inscription of Jajalladeva I, V.V. Mirashi, ed.,
CJ.J. vol. IV, Inscriptions of the Kalacuri-Cedi Era (Ootacamund, 1955),
p. 409; the Lakhamandala inscription, Zpigraphia Itulica1,1892, p. lOff.
33 Romila Thapar, 'Genealogy ...'.
SOCIETY AND HISTORICAL CONSCIOUSNESS 159
among the Candravam&a are given pre-eminence, those of the
Purus controlling the western Ganga valley and the more diffused
Yadavas migrating to western and central India. The segments are
all treated as ksatriyas, even though at times this status conflicts
with the status assigned to some of them in other sources.34 Thus
the genealogy was a method of legitimizing all those who had held
power. However, they had to have performed the brahmanical
sacrificial ritual in order to be included in the itihasa-purana, for
those who were lax in this matter were either dropped altogether,
such as the Licchavis, or like the ¿akyas were merely mentioned
en passant.35
The Mahabharata war acts as another time-marker and brings
to the battlefield virtually all the lineages of the Candravamia, and
a few others as well, and marks the death of the lineages. That it
was a terminal event is reflected in the switch to the future tense
after the war, suggesting a prophetic form, and is followed by
details on dynastic succession in the kingdom of Magadha, an area
which emerged in fact as the most powerful kingdom of the Ganga
valley. Descent lists now become king lists mentioning historically
attested dynasties—Nandas, Mauryas, ¿ungas, K&nvas, Andhras,
and so on, as well as the regnal years of kings. The genealogical
record thus indicates a change to monarchies during this period,
a change which was of considerable historical importance. Those
dynasties which did not claim links with earlier descent groups
such as the Indo-G reeks, &akas, Kusanas and Ksatrapas receive
short shrift at the hands of the genealogists. The Yavanas as a
34 Pargiter, The Ancient Indian Historical Tradition, p. 109ft Manu, X. 8, X.
23 refers to the Andhras and Satvats as bUdras. the Andhras are identified
with the Andhaka of the Andhaka-Vrsni group and the Vrsnis married the
SStvats. Panini, n.2.95 and VL^ 34, refers to the Andhaka and the Vrsnis as
being ksatriya gotras. The events of the MahtibhSrata suggest that the Vrsnis
were of a lower status, fudging by the objection of some of the ksatriyas
present to giving Knna the status of the honoured guest SabhSparvan,
pp. 33.26ffc 34.1 ff.
35 Vifnu Purina. IV. IX
160 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
generalized term are described as the descendants of the Turvafea,
who, as a segment of the Candravam&a, become relatively insig­
nificant fairly early in the genealogical listing.36 The entry of
kudras as kings, be they Indian or foreign, was of course seen as
the inevitable consequence of social imbalances foretold for the
Kaliyuga. The vambanucarita section therefore becomes a preserva­
tion of the record of social and political relations as perceived at a
crucial historical moment, and incorporates much of what was
believed to be historically accurate. This is put together in a
distinctive structure which not only gives form to the past but also
becomes a charter of sanction for existing social institutions as well
as a potential charter for future claims to legitimacy and status.
PurSnic literature, in the sections other than the vamkanu-
carita, reflects facets of change which impinged upon the historical
tradition. It comprises essentially assimilative texts where the
Sanskritic tradition and the local tradition are sought to be inter­
meshed. This was inevitable in a situation where those of a
Sanskritic cultural milieu received grants of land and settled in
areas where the exposure to Sanskritic culture had been relatively
sparse, if at all. Some degree of mutual interchange was required,
even if for no other purpose than that of establishing dominance.
The PurSnic texts with their various sub-categories are facets
of this development. The culture of the dominant and of the sub­
ordinate remained distinct, but proximity and some degree of
absorption smoothened the edges of an otherwise angular re­
lationship in many areas. The rhetoric of the Great Tradition and
the systematizing of substratum cultures, both of which are re­
flected in the Puranas, made the literature acceptable to the audi­
ence and useful in mobilizing social and political action.37
36 MahabhSrata, Adiparvan, 80.1ff.
37 Examples of such adjustments extend even to the literal Sanskritization
of non-Sanskrit names, and to the stoiy which relates the event e.g. the
¿ailodbhava dynasty in its origin myth relates the stoiy of how a brShmtma
was requested to create a man out of chips of rock, and thus the ancestor of
the ¿ailodbhavas was created, the story evidently explaining the Sanskriti-
SOCIETY AND HISTORICAL CONSCIOUSNESS 161
V
A more clearly recognizable historical tradition is evident in the
post-Gupta period, linked in part to the historical changes of the
early and mid first millennium AD. The states of this period were
territorially not as large as the Mauryan and the Kusana, for
example. There was a multiplicity of state formation, particularly
in areas hitherto regarded as peripheral or marginal and often
characterized by a lineage society. Many of these new states
emerged as a consequence of the changes in agrarian relations in
the earlier established states, when the system of making grants of
land became current. These changes required new processes of
authority, law and revenue collection in areas which earlier were
either outside the state system or on the edge of it. The change was
not limited to the political arena but also introduced new forms of
a wider social mobility. There was a growth of sectarian religious
groups, some of which professed a doctrinal cult {bhakti, narrow­
ing in on an individual's devotion to a particular deity); others
which attempted to systematize more earthly cults of fertility and
magic; and still others which remained loyal lay supporters of the
Buddhist and Jaina sangha. It was also perhaps in part a reaction
to this last group which motivated the increasing interest in an
ttihasa-purana. Both the Buddhists and the Jainas had shown a
sense of centring their sects in avowedly historical events which
imparted a certain historicity and added to the intellectual
strength of their institutions. The historicity of the Buddha and
Mahavlra was emphasized, major events in the history of the
respective sanghas were linked to political events and person­
alities, chronology was often calculated on the basis of the date of
the death of the Buddha and of Mahavlra. This point was not
missed by other groups and in the latter half of the first millennium
AD when Vaisnava and ¿aiva sects competed for royal patronage,
they not only established monastic institutions but also introduced
zation of a non-Sanskrit name. R.G. Basak, History of North-Eastern India
(Calcutta, 1967), p. 211ff.
162 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
a historical dimension into the discussion on the evolution of the
sect. It can be argued that Buddhist and Jaina sects arose as a part
of a counter-culture and therefore as groups in dissent had a
dearer sense of their historical purpose.38 This is a partial explana­
tion of a far more complex question: why Buddhism has a more
recognizable sense of externalized history—a question which can­
not be discussed in this brief essay. Be it said in passing that apart
from considerations of eschatology and epistemology, all of which
have their own significance, it is as well to consider also that
Buddhism and Jainism were quite early on institutionally based
and moved fairly soon to becoming property holders on a consid­
erable scale. As such the records of their evolution did not merely
narrate the life of the Buddha and the history of the sangha (with
its various divergent sects, each claiming status and authenticity),
but also described the building of monasteries, the amassing of
property and the rights to controlling these—rights which became
complex and competitive with the fissioning off of sects from the
main stems. The sense of the historicity of the sect becomes evident
even in ¿aiva and Vaisnava sects when they begin to locate them­
selves in Sbramas and mathas and become immensely wealthy
property holders, and when intensified competition for patronage
has to be supported by claims to legitimacy—which require a
substantial input of historically phrased argument.
Implicit in the genealogical form is the notion of time and
chronology. The arrangement of events in a chronological order is
less precise for earlier times and only when sequential causation
becomes important does chronological precision enter the focus of
history. Genealogical generations indicate time periods, as also do
regnal years. The latter move from fanciful figures to more cred­
ible ones as the dynastic lists approach historically attested time.
Thus the chronology given for the ¿i&un2ga, Nandas, Mauryas and
other dynasties is feasible. The arrangement of chronological
38 Romila Thapar, 'Renunciation: the making of a Counter-culture?/ in
AiSH, p. 63ff.
1
SOCIETY AND HISTORICAL CONSCIOUSNESS 163
order becomes more important as historical memory becomes less
embedded. The cosmological time of the mahayuga and the start of
the Kaliyuga gives way to historical time.39 The accuracy of his­
torical time increases by the reference to dateable eras—the Krta
(c. 58 BC), ¿aka (AD 78), Gupta (AD 319-20), Cedi (c. AD 249), Hajsa
(AD 606), and so on: and by the very precise dates recorded in era,
regnal year, season, month, lunar fortnight and day in the inscrip­
tions. The era, apart from commemorating an event, can also be
seen as a capturing of time, symbolic of an articulation of power
in a context where time is viewed as part of an eventual point of
destruction. The word for time is kola from the root kal 'to cal­
culate', which suggests a meaning indicative of measurement
39 Cosmological time moves in the MahSyuga of 4,320,000 years and the
complete cycle is then divided into four yugas: the Krta of 1,728,000 years;
the Tret§ of 1,296,000 years, the DvSpara of 864,000 years and the Kaliyuga
of 432*000 yean, the size of the yugas declining in arithmetical progression.
The Kaliyuga is crucial and there is a regular reduction by substracting the
length of the Kaliyuga from each preceding yuga, an orderliness which is
basic to the concept The numbers used are quasi-mathematical, a mixture
of magic and astronomy. Numbers such as 3,7,12 and 72 are considered
magical and constitute the fractions in the figures. Thus 432*000 * 60 x 7200,
and this further introduces the sexagesimal unit of 60, frequently used in
indent West Asia as well as in south Indian astrology. The Babylonian
tradition also uses 72,1,200 and 43&000 for its chronology 0. Campbell, The
Masks of the Gods, vol. II, New York, 1959, p. 128ff.) and the Jyotisa-vedanga
shows a familiarity with Babylonian astronomy and mathematics.
(D. Pingree, 'The Mesopotamian Origin of Early Indian Mathematical As­
tronomy/ Journal for the History of Astronomy, 1973, IV, pp. 1-12.) The figure
of 72 years is taken to calculate the processional lag moving over one degree
and 432*000 is the basis of calculating the epkyde. Was cosmological time
the earlier and more popular astronomical knowledge which was deliberate­
ly preserved in this manner, as distinct from the mathematics and the
solar-based astronomy of the period reflected in the more formal writings of
scientists such as Aryabhafta? As a contrast to these majuscule dimensions
there are also the miniscule fractional parts of time listed in Jaina texts of the
late first and the early second millennia AD. Interestingly, the description of
the yugas and kalpas is spatial, e.g. Samyutta Ntkaya, XV.1.5-8.
164 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
Perhaps because of the cyclical theory it was also associated with
destruction in the sense of the end of time.
The inevitability of time is strengthened by the use of pro­
phecies in genealogies, for time is the ultimate destroyer, ntaha-
JfcaZa. Cosmological time is distinct from historical time not only by
its mathematical pattern and the spatial form in its description, but
also by its total orderliness, an orderliness which emphasizes its
unreality. This in part might also explain the margjnality of chilias-
tic and millenarian movements in such a pattern as compared to
the Judaeo-Christian tradition in which they play a distinctive
role. The coming of Vi§nu as Kalkin arises out of an anxiety
relating to the present—the wish to terminate the inequities of the
Kaliyuga through Visnu yet again being incarnated as a saviour
figure. But such a termination is predetermined by the length of
the cycle and will in any case lead to the ultimate ending of the
cycle. It is more to the weakness of the eschatology that the
marginality of millenarian movements can be attributed. The in­
terplay of cosmological and historical time in the brahmanical
tradition can perhaps be explained partially by the yajna and
ixtrna requirements which were part of the process of legitimizing
families and cults. Cyclical time it has been argued, goes counter
to an eschatology which would point to a historical change to­
wards a directed goal40 Yet within the mahayuga there is an em­
phasis on change. It is change rather than repetition which is
inherent in the concept, and within this the explanation of change
is also implicit.41
The notion of change is even more central to the Buddhist
concept of time.42 Because of the claim to the historicity of the
Buddha there is a single, central point to which all events relate
chronologically, namely the Mahaparinirvdna, the death of the
40 M. Eliade, Cosmos and History (New York, 1959).
41 Kalhana, Rajatarangim, V. 21.
42 A.L. Basham, The Wonder That Was India (London, 1964), pp. 272-3;
Dtgha NOdfya, HI, p. 75ff.
SOCIETY AND HISTORICAL CONSCIOUSNESS 165
Buddha. Buddhist eschatology envisages the extinction of con­
sciousness in nirvana, which, although seemingly negative, is the
aim of human endeavour since it is a release from rebirth. Change
within cosmological time is emphasized further by the cyclic
movement of time taking the form of a spiral, in that the cycle
never returns to its point of origin: and a spiral if fully stretched
can become a wave, if not a linear form. The rise and fall within
the cycle purports constant change and even the fall carries within
it the eventual upward swing of the cycle, and this is conducive to
the idea of a coming millennium, an idea envisaged in the Buddha
Maitreya. This in turn is paralleled by decay carrying within it the
seeds of the regeneration.
The precision of historical time as recorded in inscriptions
probably derived from the more widespread use of the solar
calendar from the first millennium AD. But it also had to do with
the legitimacy of the individual in authority, for the inscription
was frequently a legal charter. Not only was the authority of the
king time bound in such charters, but so also was his claim to the
property which he was donating in as much as later kings could
revoke these grants in spite of the insistence in the inscriptions that
they were given in perpetuity. An additional factor was the in­
fluence of the idea that all actions are conditioned by the auspi-
dousness of the moment when they are carried out, and in the case
of donations and grants this would be particularly apposite.43 The
multiple use of historical time focused on the individual and gave
43 Some of the dates for inscriptions were provided by astrologers, and
these indude astronomical details. However they are not always correct
D.C Sircar, Studies in Society and Administration of Ancient and Medieval India,
vol. I (Calcutta, 1967), pp. 171-2. It is worth noting that apart from the legal
charters, another sphere of life in which time was very precisely recorded
was the horoscope. As a corollary to this it is interesting that an almost exact
counterpart to the careful record of time in inscriptions is to be found in
discussions on the precise time for conducting a yajAa, where the time is again
indicated in terms of the year, season, month, lunar fortnight, constellation,
date and time of day.
166 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
sharper definition to the individual as a figure of authority: an idea
by no means unfamiliar by now in the historical consciousness of
the period. A fuller exposition of this idea had come from Buddhist
sources. A&oka Maurya, as a patron of Buddhism, acquired an
accretion of legends, some of which were gathered into the Akoka-
vadana. The attempt was to give historicity to the Buddhist
sangha by linking it to a powerful political personality, a notion
which was not alien to the emergence of much of the other non-
Buddhist carita literature. The need to write the biography of the
Buddha, buddha-carita, had been felt since the time of the early
monastic movement and the first missions. It changed from being
a part of the canonical texts to a separate genre of literature.44
Gradually the idea of biography was extended to the 'hero' in a
wider context. A historical background is also helpful to organized
missionary activity in new areas where antecedents have to be
explained; this was useful to the entry of Buddhism into Asia, as
indeed it was useful to brahmanical centres in the more remote
parts of the Indian subcontinent. The carita tradition doubtless also
drew on the prabastis incorporated in a number of early inscrip­
tions, such as that of KhSravela at H2thigumph& and Rudrad&nan
at Junagadh; a style which became more elaborate in time as
evidenced by the Udaipur raj-prabasti*5
VI
Those in authority seek validation from the past, and this valida­
tion was the starting point of a new category of texts, the vamba-
valTs and the caritas of the post-Gupta period. The vambaualls were
the histories of the ruling families in specific geographical regions,
the latter often coinciding with the new kingdoms and states in
44 This change is reflected in the difference between the Suttas and the
Vinaya, where the life of the Buddha is part of canonical scripture, and
Afcvagho$a's Buddhacarita, which is a biography perse.
^D.C. Sircar, Select Inscriptions, second edition (Calcutta, 1965), pp. 213-
19,175-80; Epigraphia Indica, voL XXIX, 1951-% parts 1-5, pp. 1-90.
SOCIETY AND HISTORICAL CONSCIOUSNESS 167
areas previously either unoccupied or settled by groups of tribes.
As a genre they lay between the lineage lists of the Puranas and the
historical biographies of individual rulers. The carita or historical
biography was a complement to the vam&wall and focused on the
king, who was seen as the centre of authority in a more radial state
system. B&nabhatta's Harsacarita led off the biographical form and
was followed by a large number of others.46 Most of the better
known ones were written between the eighth and twelfth centuries
AD, but as a form carita literature continued into later times, in each
case commemorating the rise of new kings. The carita was un­
ashamedly the eulogy of the patron, but the persons chosen were
those who had a special status and function in the ruling family
and were contributors of a more than ordinary kind, not only to
their own families but also to the consolidation of kingdoms and
kingship. The rhetoric of eulogy when deconstructed would
doubtless reveal multiple relationships within a courtly edifice of
norms and actions, and despite the ambiguity in presenting hard
historical data much of the subtlety of historical nuance can be
gathered from these biographies. Carita literature also focuses on
other aspects of the individual in society. Cyclic time carries a
certain inevitability but the individual can opt out of it, and on a
lesser level this is demonstrated in biographies where the karma of
the individual may play a larger role than the inevitability of the
time cyder and the individual karma and its historic role was
central to the doctrine of Buddhism as well as the ideology of the
bhakti tradition.
On occasion the subjects of the biographies were younger
brothers who had come to rule (as for example, Harsavardhana
and VikramSditya VI), and their legitimacy over other claimants
46 Such as VSkapati's GaudevSho on Yabovarman of Kannauj; Bilhana's
VikramOnkadevacarita on VlkramBditya VI, the Calukya king; SandhySkaran-
andin's RSmacarita on RSmapSla; JaySnaka's Prthvirajmrijaya; Nayacandra
Sun's Hemmra-mahakauyir, Some&varadeva's Ktrtikaumudi, a biography of
Vastupala, who, although not a king, was a person of great political Impor­
tance; and Hemacandra's KumSrapStacarita.
168 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
had to be established. The royal patron was linked with the major
lineages of the itihfoa-pur&na or with a new lineage which had
acquired status since then, such as the Agni-kula among Rajputs
or the N£gavam&a among certain central Indian dynasties. The
canto was essentially a literary form in origin and thus a far cry
from the bardic fragments of epic times. The most sophisticated
courtly tradition found expression in this literature and the courtly
values of chivalry, heroism and loyalty were at a premium.47 Two
obvious characteristics of this form were the depiction of the king
as the focus of the court and a clear awareness of a well-defined
geographical area which constituted the kingdom and was iden­
tified with the dynasty. Obeisance is made to the lineage but it
plays a secondary role in relation to the king who is now most
clearly the figure of formal political authority in both state and
society.
Political decentralization inherent in the granting of land on a
large scale encouraged a competition among families aspiring to
dynastic status. Dynasties survived through an assertion of power,
legitimacy and recourse to marriage alliances with ambitious
feudatories. Attempts to restructure the economic potential within
certain areas of the state and to balance the intricate relationship
between royal power, brahmanical authority and the dominant
religious cults of the region become a further support to power.
The emphasis on territory had again to do with the jostling of new
states and with the legitimizing of the economic and administra­
tive changes which the system of land grants introduced into the
kingdoms.
The vambawti was the chronicle of a dynasty, and inevitably
also the chronicle of the territory controlled by the dynasty. The
vamSavali therefore used as source material the various local
Puranas as well as the oral tradition.48 It became the characteristic
4^ V.S. Pathak, Ancient Historians of India (Bombay, 1966), p. 21 ff.
48 The sources drawn upon by the authors of the vajniavalis induded the
sthala-puranas, upa-puranas, tirtha-puranas, caste puranas and mahStmyas, all of
SOCIETY AND HISTORICAL CONSCIOUSNESS 169
literature of the new states in various parts of the subcontinent in
the early second millennium AD. This is indicative of some ele­
ments of similarity in historical change, which in turn reflects a
degree of cultural uniformity. These elements do not indicate the
influence of one dominant regional culture over the others, but
rather the expression of a similar historical situation, which, for­
mulated in a certain kind of literature, was common to many
regions.
The structure of the vam&wafi was almost identical in all these
regions. The earliest section narrated the origin myths pertaining
to the region and the dynasty. In this there was a recording of local
lore as well as a borrowing from the itihasa-purana tradition. At­
tempts were made to link local history with themes from the
which were texts recording the past and the evolution of places, sects and
deities, locations of pilgrimage, dominant castes and local history. Such texts
were part of the larger Purilnic tradition and, although conforming to the
major Purina» in sprit if not in form, induded a large amount of local and
regional data. The oral sources consisted of bardic fragments and ballads on
local heroes and events of significance, not to mention the genealogies and
marriage alliances of land-owning families, for the bardic tradition was
still alive, as it remains to this day. It has been argued that Kalhana's
Rljatarangim, a fine example of a vamkSodS, was a unique document in that
it was the only genuine piece of historical writing from India (A.L. Basham,
'The Kashmir Chronicle/ in C R Philips, Historians of India, Pakistan and
Ceylon (Oxford, 1961), p. 57ff). Yet the t*ambavaE form occurs in various parts
of the country—from the neighbouring Chamba vamhavaR (Ph. Vogel, The
Antiquities of Chamba State, Calcutta, 1911, AS./., vol. 36) to the most distant
MQsakavamba or chronide of the Ay dynasty in Kerala. Gopinath Rao, 'Ex­
tracts from the M Osaka vam&am... / Travancore Archaeological Series, 1916,
n.l, no. 10, pp. 87-113; See also M.G.S. Narayanan, 'History from Musaka-
vam&a-klvya of Atula/ PA.LO.C. (Jadhavpur, 1969). Curiously in both cases
the founder is bom in a cave (guh£) and is assodated with a mu$aka-
vamba (literally: 'mouse lineage'). A better known cave assoriation is of
course that of the Guhilots of Mewar (J. Tod I p- 173ff.)< For further lists of
vambavaUs see A.K. Warder, Introduction to Indian Historiography (Bombay,
1972), and J.P. de Souza and C.M. Kulkami, eds., Historiography in Indian
Languages (Delhi 1972).
170 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
Puranas incorporating the myths and the genealogies of the Great
Tradition with local persons and places. The PurSnas were die
prototypes and local personalities were the protagonists. This
required the continued availability of the Puranas as sources from
which the vamkava&s could draw. The major part of the text,
however, dealt with more contemporary events, and a history of
the ruling dynasty was narrated giving its genealogy and referring
to important events associated with the dynasty. The veracity of
this information can often be ascertained by comparing it with the
»
evidence of inscriptions, since many of the grants of land were
recorded on copper plates or on temple walls. Whereas the need
for a vambavall was motivated by the acquisition of power, the
historically authenticated section would appear to coincide with
the constitution of power, often articulated in the taking of royal
titles such as maharajadhiraja. Concomitant with this was the accep­
tance of responsibilities of power by the family. The authors of the
vamkSvaUs were court poets and officials and were therefore fam­
iliar with political and administrative concerns. The vamkavalis
would also be important to those who received grants of land in
vouching for the legitimacy of the granting authority.
The vambavati differs from the earlier tradition in that it le­
gitimates a particular family and not an entire lineage, and to that
extent the legitimation of lineage is indirect. The family was not
seen merely as a household of agnatic and affinal kinsfolk but was
the hub of power. It drew its strength both from claims to high
descent as well as to property. Marriage alliances were controlled
because dowry and inheritance were a part of the property struc­
ture. Such forms of the legitimation of families in power and of
regions was of more immediate necessity to newly risen families
in small states. The vamhavatt therefore was by its very nature not
a record of expansionist states. The major dynasties of the past,
such as the Nandas and Mauryas, were not the models and only
the very early lineages were considered possible sources of status.
The appeal was not to the political system of the state but to
sources of power which could back up the economic reality of
SOCIETY AND HISTORICAL CONSCIOUSNESS 171
aristocratic families with visions of dynastic ambition. It is sig­
nificant that the cmitas and the twm&raa/Fs take up the narrative, as
it were, from where the major Puranas leave off. The Puranic
accounts of die ruling dynasties come to a close soon after the
Guptas. The dynasties listed prior to these are mainly of the core
regions of the Ganga valley and western and northern India. That
die account was not continued in these Puranas was probably
because there was a bigger distribution of centres of power in the
post-Gupta period, and in each of such areas local Puranas and
chronicles of various kinds began to be maintained. These texts
often incorporate both the Puranic tradition and the local tradition,
as is exemplified in those cases where legitimation is sought by
reference to local myths of descent—as in the case of the Agni-kula
Rajputs and the Nagavam&s of central India.
As a form the vambavaH was not restricted to dynastic chron­
icles and was adapted to the history of other institutions as well.
Some of these were monastic institutions where not only was the
succession of elders chronicled but also their relations with politi­
cal authority. This dynastic and political information pertained
either to royal patrons of the institution or recorded relations
between the institution and political authority, generally in the
context of the institution establishing its own legitimacy. An early
expression of this relationship is evident from die Buddhist tradi­
tion where monastic chronicles were a regular part of the historical
tradition.49
49 The Mahavamsa, as the chronide of the Mahlvihira monastery in Sri
Lanka composed in the mid first millennium AD, is primarily concerned
with establishing its legitimacy both as the fount of the pristine teaching of
the Buddha as well as in its interaction with political authority. Thus the
ThenvSda sect which was established in the MahSvihSra monastery, is said
to have originated from the schism at the Coundl of PSfaliputra, called at
the initiative of Atoka Maurya, and was established in Sri Lanka largely
through the patronage of Devlnampiya Tissa. Buddhist chronicles do tend
to show a greater degree of historical determinism. Sri Lanka is predestined
for the establishment of Buddhism. Events move towards proclaiming die
172 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
In attempting to establish the legitimacy of the dynasties or
institutions whose history they are recording, chronicles stress the
uniqueness of historical events relating to the origin and history
of the subject of the chronicle, with indications of its growth and
change. Actions are directed towards a goal, often resulting in the
success of the subject Chronicles are therefore compiled when a
dynasty or institution has established itself and is recognized as
powerful The chronicle helps to establish its claims to authority
over competing groups, especially those which are politically
important. The borrowing from the itihasa-purana tradition sug­
gests continuity and also stresses legitimacy, for the new group is
seen as being related to those who were in power in the past and
can also claim antiquity by maintaining these connections with
earlier lineages. The chronicle is again the statement of the success­
ful group and manages to deflect if not erase the presence of com­
petitors. This becomes a particularly useful aspect of the chronicle
in a society where not only dissent but even protest often takes the
form of opting out or migration away, in preference to confronta­
tion.30
If changing forms in the expression of historical consciousness
symbolize historical change, and if changes in the political forms
of society are reflected in the nature of historical expression, then
the itihasa-purana tradition would point to three phases in the
unfolding of early Indian history. Initially, in lineage societies,
historical consciousness was embedded and recorded the percep­
tion of the ordering of lineages. With the evolution of states in
northern India the second phase was inaugurated, focusing on
dynastic power and the supremacy of the state as a system which
in the political arena seems to have overridden caste ordering. The
primacy of the stmgha. L.S. Perera, 'The Pali Chronicles of Ceylon/ in C.H.
Philips, p. 29ff. This is further emphasized by the notion of causality and
contract so central to Buddhist ethics, and by the historical role of the
missionaries who propagate Buddhism in new areas.
50 Romila Thapar, 'Dissent and Protest in the Early Indian Tradition,4
Studies in History, 1979, vol. I, no. % pp. 177-95.
SOCIETY AND HISTORICAL CONSCIOUSNESS 173
post-Gupta period saw a change in the structure of the state,
accompanied by the need in many cases for the legitimation of
status of ruling families.
Historical consciousness in early India took a form which
grew out of embedded history. Part of the explanation for this may
lie in the fact that the varna ordering of society, which never fully
coincided with a clearly defined socio-economic stratification,
carried a large element of the lineage-based structure and there­
fore also the embedded history of that structure. Where ksatriya
legitimation became necessary, the itihasa-purana tradition was
strengthened with a drawing upon embedded history for origins.
In such cases the past in relation to political power became a
ksatriya past. But at the same time it did not remain embedded.
Although the origin myths of the dynasties recorded in the
varhbavaUs become something of a mantra or a formula, this should
not hide the fact that despite the continuing idiom from the past
there is a substantial historical core in the vambavafi which is
distinguished from the embedded section, and which is therefore
a break from the past and takes the form of historical conscious­
ness expressed as externalized history.
Index
Achaemenid, 77 A&vapati Kaikeya, 134
agrahira, 65,73 tttman, 133,135
agriculture, 98,102ff Austric, 81,84,95
ahtmsâ, 72 atatara, 74
AjStabatni, 134 Ayodhya, 67
Ajivika, 64
Skhy&ut, 144ft, 152 Baden-Powell, B.H., 49,58
Alberunl, 63 Bailey, H.W., 3
Allchin, 10 Bakker, A., 67
Amarako&e, 75 M i, 120,146
Anderson, B., 61 B&na, 167
Andhra^ 159 bard, 147
apsarS, 71 Barth, Av 36
Arabic, 77 Basham, A.L., 11,164,169
aranya, 149 Beal, Sv 73
archaeology, 96 Bendix, R., 58
Arthaidstra, 14,96,121,124,126, Bernier, F., 7
129,151 bhSga, 120
Jrya/lryan, 3 if, 84, lOlff Bhagavad-gitS, 72, 92
Aryanrace, 3ff, 28ff, 81ff bhakti, 18,66ff, 76ff,93,108,
Asiatic Mode of Production, 7ff, 132; 161,167
19,104ff Bhandarkar, D.R., 78,79
tuhrafs, 80 Bharatas, 84,145
Aioka, 63,166,171 Bhartfhari, 91 ff
A so pa, J.N., 156 Bhil, 155
Skrama, 162 Bhlsma, 151
A&vagho$a, 166 bhrtya, 153
ASvQÏàyana Grhasütra, 75 Bilhana, 167
akvomedha, 118 biographies, 21,139,166ff
INDEX 175
Black-and-red Ware, 11,115 Chayanov, A.V., 118
Bloch, J., 63 Childe, Gv 111
Bloch, M* HOff China, 20,137
Bose, NJC, 12 Christian / Christianity, 69,71ff,
Bougie, C, 24,37ff,54ff 77,86,164
brühmaivo, 15,39,51,53,55#, chronides, 21,171ff
63ff,83,118ff, 130ff, 133ff, chronology, 90ff, 162ff
141ff, 153ff Gaessen, H. and Skalnik, P., 156
Brähmanas (texts), 84,119ft, 140, Colebxooke, H., 2
144,151 colonialism, 22,52ff
Braudel, Fv 111 communalism, 61£f
Brhaddeoatä, 84 Confucianism, 50
Bfhaspati, 76 conversion, 86
Briffault, Rv 99
British, Iff, 89ff, 97, lllff Dales, G.F., 10,
Brough, )., 94 dam, 36ff, 145ff
Buddhism/Buddhist, 15,18,21, dana-stuti, 143ff
24, 36,40,46ff, 49ff, 54ff, 62ff, danda, 17
85,97,104,110,135,143,153, Dandekar, A., 65
161ff,171ff Dange, S.A., 107
Bulke, C., 146 Dani, A.H, 125
bureaucracy 15 dOsa, 4, 84,94,108
Burrow, Tv 11, 83, 94 debt bondage, 126,131
Deleury, G.A., 132
Campbell,}., 163 Desai P.B., 73
Candella, 155ff Deshpande, M.M. and Hook, P.,
Candravamàa, 140£f, 150,155, 83,94
157,159ff Deussen, P., 134
canta, 139,166ff dharma, 77
Carr, EH., 113 dharmaMstra, 14,28,63,75ff, 84,
caste, 4,12ff, 25ff, 38ff, 48ff, 55ff, 107,126,129,133,151
66ff, 76£f, 84ff, 93,98ff, dharnrnutra, 121,126
151ff divinity, 17
Cedi, 146 Draupadi, 80,150
Central Asia, 82ff Dra vidian, 4,28ff, 81ff, 84
Chattopadhyaya, B.D., 128,147, Duff, G„ 28
156 Dumezil, G., 24,58
Chattopadhyaya, D.P., 134 Dumont, L., 26,58
Chaudhuri, K.A., 103 Durkheim, R, 24ff, 34,58
176 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
East India Company, 2,5,72 goto1,27,31,94,99
ecology, 114ff gribna, 149
Ehrenfels, O.Rv 99 Gxamsd, A., 87
Eliade, M., 141,164 Greco-Roman, 43,53,106,110
Embree, A., 9 Greece, 20,137
Emeneau, MB., 11,94 Greek* 78,96, 111
empire, 16,44 Cuhilot, 155
Engels, Fv 99, lllff guilds, 74,76,97,104,125
Ennew, Jv 118 Gunawardana, R.A.L.H., 7
epic, 143ff, 146ff Guptas, 92,105,108ff, 156,171
Epigraphia 7ndica, 73,75,78,122,
154,166 Haihaya, 158
eras, 163 HaH D.G.E, 1
Haileybuiy College, 6ff
FaHsien,63 Harappa/Indus civilization, lOff,
feudalism, 128ff 82ff, 98, lOlff, 115
Feudal Mode of Production, 108 Harris, M., 115
Fick,R*28,93 Harrison, M., 118
Finley, M., Ill Har^avardhana, 167
Fiser, I., 126 Heesterman, J.C., 25,58
Fleet, JJ., 76 Hegel G.W.F., 6
Flood myth, 140ff, 158 Held, G., 24,58
Fox, R.GV 154 Heltebeitel A., 80
Frankfort, Hv 106 Hemacandra, 167
Frazer, G* 24 HemAdri, 78
Freund, ]., 42 hero-stones, 131
Fried, M.H* 117 Heston, A., 115
Hindu, 77,89,97
gahapeti, 119ff Hindu community, 61ff
Ganga-Yamuna Doab, 11,118 Hinduism, 47,54,62ff, 85ff
¿*04,144 Hopkins, E.W., 28,48,147
genealogies, 138ff„ 152ff Hsflan Tsang, 63,67
gift, 120ff, 145ff Hubert H., 24,36ff, 58
Goa, 106 Hughes, S., 41,52
Gobineau Comte de, 4 Humphreys, S.C. and King, H.,
Godelier, M., 112 131
Golchale, V.V., 92 H&na, 73,76
Gond, 155ff
Gopinatha, Rao, 169 Ibbetson, D.C.JV 30
INDEX 177
Ikfvflku, 140ff, 158 Kabir, 79
IJa/Aila, 140ff, 158 Kalluqia, 73,164,169
Indo-Aryan, 84,115 Kaliyuga, 153,160,163ff
Indo-European, 3ff, 82 Kane, P.V., 14
Indo-Greeks, 153,159 Kantowsky, Dv 59
Indologlsts/Indology, 2ff, KaAvas, 152,159
91ff Karashima, Nv 131
India, 70,101,144,148 karma, 49ff, 70ff, 167
Indus civilization, see Harappa Karnataka, 73
Ingalls, D., 92 kar$aka/kassaka, 121,131
Iran, 82ff kathd, 144,146,152
iron, 102ff kiyastha, 15
irrigation, 16 kivya, 147
Islam, 50,54> 69,72, 77ff, 80ff, 86, Keith, A.B* 134
89 Khflravela, 166
itihisa-jmr&na, 20,138,151,154, Knopf, D., 85
157,168 Koebner, R., 6
Kosambi D.D., 123,128
Jacobi, R, 146 Krsna, 67,69ff, 145,148
Jaganndtha, 132 K$atrapas, 159
Jainism/Jainas, 18,50,54,62, Hatriya, 15,39,48,71,115ff, 133ff,
64ff, 85,104, 153,161ff 141 ff, 150ff
/an*, 27,144,145 kula, 27,75
Janaka, 134 Kulke, R, 66,110,132
Janamejaya, 147 Kuru, 145
janapada, 75 Ku$2Lna, 125,153,156,159,161
Jarrige, Jv 82
J&taka, 70,127,131,144 labour, 120ff
filit 12,27,29ff, 76,80,97,104, Lai B.B., 11
119,130,133 Lambrick, H.T., 10
Jay&naka, 167 land, 1175,108ff, 120ff, 154ff,
Jayaswal, ICPV 8 161ff
Jayatilleke, ICN., 135 Lassen, CH 28
Jettmar, K-, 125 law, 72,75
Jha,D.Nv 128 Legge, J., 63
Jones, W., 2 legitimation/legitimacy, 130,138,
Joshi, J.P* 115 150,154ff
Joshi, S.DV 63,136 Leopold, U 3
Judaism, 53 Lewis, Jv 42
178 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
lineage, 118ft, 138ft McCrindle, J.W., 63
linguistic identity, 82ff Megasthenes, 63,107
UuXmru,73 middle-class, 86
Lyall, A., 30,33 MiU, James, 5,33,59,81,89ft
Miller, W.B., 149,154
MacAdam* R., 114 millenarianism, 164
MacdoneO, A.A. and Keith, A.BV mleocha, 78,80ft, 134,152
119 Momigliano, A., 1
madkya^Uàa, 147,148 monastic landlordism, $7,110
Magadha, 159 Monier-Williams, M., 27
mSgadha, 151 Mookeijl R.K.,8
Mah&hdrata, 25,36,70,99,123, Morgan, L, 111
127,132,140,142,144,145, Morrison, B., 14,109
146,149ff, 159 Mukhia, R, 128
mJOOtmya, 98,168 Mailer, M., 3H, 28ff, 30,32,59,99
Mahavamsa, 171ft myth, 98ft, 138ff, 140ft, 169ft
Mah&vamsafóS, 153
mahàyuga, 163ft Nigabansi/Nagavaipfci, 15,168,
Maine, R, 32,41 171
Maitrakas, 15 Nandas, 152,159,162; 170
Maitreya, 165 NSradasmxti, 76
Malamoud, Cv 112 n&raèamsì, 144
Malwa, 79 Narayanan, M.G.S., 169
Mandelbaum, D., 12 Nationalist historians, 8ft
mangal-tibya.JSO Nayacandra S&ri, 167
mantra, 17 Nesfield, J.C* 31
Manu, 28,67,72,75,154,159 nigama, 124
Manu (minava), 140ft, 158 NikSya, 121ft 136,163,164
Maratha, 97 numismatics, 95ff, 124ft
Marshall b, 75
Marx/Marxism, 7,32ft, 42ft, 54, Ochre Colour Pottery, 11
100ft, 104ft Odend'hal S.,115
Masson-Oursel Pv 24ft Oldenberg, H* 28,36
ma^ha, 162 Oriental Despotism, 6ft, 14,19,
Mathura, 67 33ft, 53,106
Maurya/Mauryan, 16,92,96, Orientalists, 2,71,85
103ft, 139,152ft, 156,159,
161ft, 170 Painted Grey Ware, 11,115
Mauss, M., 24ft, 36ft Panini 75,92,159
INDEX 179
Pargiter, F.E, 84,130,152,159 räjanya, 117ff
Parthian, 153 räjasüya, 118,123,145
p&scmda, 74 Rajput, 168,171
Patafljali, 63,92,136 RSxna, 67,69ff, 148,150
Pathak, V.S., 168 RJtrrOyana, 70,122,146,149
Patnaik, Uv 118 Ranakumbha, 7
patronage, 68,73 Rapson, EJV154
Paumaatryam, 70 Raschke, MC, 125
peasant, 118ff, 156ff Ratnagar, S., 114
Perera, L.S., 21,172 Reinhold, Mv 45
persecution, 72ff renouncers, 149
Philips, C.H., 1 revenue, 16,156
philology, 2 revolt, 131
Pickering, W.S.F., 36 Rg Veda, 4,10,29,83,84,141,142,
Pictet, A., 28 144,148
Pingree, D., 163 Rhys Davids, T.R., 93
pitrloka, 71 Risley, H., 31,40,48, 81
Poliakov, L., 4 Robertson-Smith, W., 24
Polyani, K, 111 Roe, T., 7
Prakrit, 92,152 Roman trade, 125,127
pratotsti, 146ff, 151,166 Rome, 18
prophets, 46ff Rostovtzeff, 44
Protestantism, 51 if Roy, A., 80
Pioto-Dravidian, 11 r /,149
Pjthu, 142,151 Rudradaman, 166
pfy, 17
Pune, 93,97 Sachau, E.C., 63
Purina, 98,127,132,138,140£f, sacrifice, 36
151ff, 160,168ff Saiva, 62,66,72ff, 161ff
Puranic religion, 65ff, 132ff Sailodbhavas, 160
Puru, 84,145,150,158ff Sakas, 78,153,159
Pururavas and UivaM, 98,144 feäkta, 62,64«
Puru$asQkta, 141 Sakya, 159
samnyäsin, 149
race, 3ff, 28ff, 40,48ff sampradaya, 69
Radhakrishnan, S., 133,135 Sandhyakaranandin, 167
Raikes, R.LV 10 sangha, 64ff, 104ff, 122,157,161ff,
rSjadharma, 17 172
Rajagrha, 124 Sanskrit, 2,3,83, 92,152
180 INTERPRETING EARLY INDIA
Sanskritization, 13,15,98 Staal, P., % 82,115
Santoshi Ma, 69 state, 120ff, 139ff, 155ff, 161 ff
Sanyal, H., 72 Stein, Bv 18
Sanna, A.V.N., 10 stùpa, 75
sàrthavàha, 125 Subh&ita-ratm-koba, 92
Sartre, J.P., 100 ïudâhi, 86
aati, 71 küära, 4,49,103,107,152ff, 160
Satvats, 159 suicide, 36
sects, 85 Sukthankar, V.S., 146,147
Semitic religions, 71 kulka, 120
Sen, K.CV 8,81 Suñgas, 152,159
Senart, E., 31 Sûiya,76
setthà, 122,125 Süryavaipia, 140ff, 153,155ff
shamanism, 135,149 süta, 151
Shanna, Dv 79 Suttanipäta, 143
Shanna, R.S., 12,14,110,128,131, svästika, 70
156
Silk Trade, 125,127 Tamil Nadu, 73,80
bilpitt, 125 Tawney, R.H., 42
Sindhu, 77 taxes, 120
Singh, G., 10 Thomson, G., Ill
Sircar, D.C., 77,165,166 Thomer, D., 7
Steunaga, 162 time, 163ff
Slave Mode of Production, 104ff Tod, J., 156,169
sUvery, 103,107,126,130 Tönnies, Fv 41
Smith, V., 28,89 Toynbee, A., 106
sítádhyaiaa, 121 trade, 97,124ff
social forms, 5,12,94ff, 103ff, transmigration, 133ff, 150
115ff, 134ff, 139 Tulpule, S.G., 65
Soedjatmoko, 1 Tulkdäs, 79
Someèvaradeva, 167 Tumska, 78ff
Sontheimer, G.D., 65 Tylor, E.B., 24
de Souza, J*P. and Kulkami,
CM., 169 untouchabUity, 74
Sparta, 107 Upanisads, 72,117,133
Spellman, ]u 17 urbanization, 17,45ff, 75ff, 104ff
Sramanism, 63ff Utilitarianism, 5ff
Srivasti, 124
Srinivas, M .N., 13 Vaisnava, 62,66ff, 161 ff
INDEX 181
vaiàya, 49 Vithoba, 132
Vakpati, 167 Vogel Ph., 169
vamia, 27,117,157 vrStya, 152,153
vamàànucarita, 138ff, 152,157ff,
160 Wagle, N., 64,124
var^Svaìi, 21,139ff, 166ff Warder, A.K., 169
van Buitenan,].A.B., 150 Weber, M., 9,24ff, 110
vànija, 125 West Asia, 82
vanta, 4,12ff, 27,29ff, 117ff, 130, Wheeler, R.E.M., 10,41ff
133,141ff, 148,153ff, 157,164 Wilson, H.H.,2
Venturini, F., 6 Wittfogel, K., 7,19,106
Vcdas, 4,63,82,84,151,157 Wolf, E., 119
Vidal-Naquet, P., 99
Vikramaditya VI, 167 Yadava, B.N.S., 128
village community, 5ff, 32ff, 75ff, Yadu/Yadavas, 150,156,158ff
105 yajamana, 117,123
Vinaya Pitaka, 75 yajAa, 17,117ff, 144ff, 164,165
Vlraàaiva’ 67,73ff yavana, 78,159
viè, 118ff Yudhighira, 123,145
Visnu, 141,148,157,164
visti, 126 Zimmer, H., 28
