
The PasT Before Us:
hisTorical TradiTions of
early norTh india

R T
omila hapaR
The Past Before Us:
historical Traditions of
early north india
Harvard (cid:48)niversity Press
Cambridge, (cid:40)assachusetts
London, England
(cid:13)(cid:11)13
Copyright © Romila Thapar, 2013
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
First published in India by Permanent Black, 2013
First Harvard University Press edition, 2013
Typeset in Gandhari by Guru Typograph Technology, Dwarka, New Delhi
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Thapar, Romila.
The past before us : historical traditions of early north India / Romila Thapar. — First
Harvard University Press edition.
pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-674-72523-2 (cloth : alk. paper)
1. India, Northeastern—Historiography. 2. India, Northeastern—History—To
1500. 3. Literature and history—India, Northeastern. 4. Collective memory—
India, North. I. Title.
DS483.65.T53 2013
934.0072—dc23 2013013539
In memoriam
d.d. kosambi
aRnaldo momigliano
friends and mentors

contents
Preface ix
Acknowledgements xiii
Abbreviations xv
Part I: the Search for a
hIStorIcal tradItIon
1 searching for early indian historical Writing 3
2 Towards historical Traditions 49
Part II: the embedded tradItIon
3 fragmentary narratives from the Vedas 87
4 The Mahābhārata 144
5 The Rāmāyaṇa 208
Part III: Interlude: the emergIng
hIStorIcal tradItIon
6 Genealogies in the Making of a historical Tradition:
The Vaṃśānucarita of the Viṣṇu Purāṇa 265
7 early inscriptions as historical statements
(Up to c. the sixth century ad) 319
8 History as Literature: The Plays of Viśākhadatta 353
Part IV: alternatIVe hIStorIeS
9 The Buddhist Tradition: Monks as historians 381
viii Contents
10 The Monastic chronicles of sri lanka 414
11 Buddhist Biographies 442
Part V: the hIStorIcal tradItIon
externalIzed
12 historical Biographies: The Harṣacarita and the
Rāmacarita 471
13 Biographies as histories 507
14 Inscriptions as Official Histories—and the Voice
of the Bard 547
15 Vaṃśāvalīs: chronicles of Place and
Person—The Rājataraṅgiṇī 597
16 The Chamba Vaṃśāvalī 626
17 The Prabandha-cintāmaṇi 651
18 Therefore: looking Back and looking forward 681
Bibliography 702
Index 737
maPS and tableS
Maps of Locations of the More Important Places, Clans,
and Dynasties
1 chapter 3 135
2 chapter 4 181
3 chapter 5 227
4 chapter 7 322
5 chapter 12 478
6 chapter 14 557
7 chapters 16 and 17 627
Tables
1 Texts of the Vedic corpus 90
2 abbreviated descent list 172
3 abbreviated descent list 229
4 historical change suggested in the Vaṃśānucarita 318
Preface
This book has been many years in the making, for it sim-
mered whilst other ideas took shape and form in various
publications. inevitably therefore i have many people to
thank and much to acknowledge.
My interest in historiography began in the 1960s but remained
without focus. This was largely because historians in india at
that time, with a couple of exceptions, were dismissive of the
subject, although my earlier conversations with d.d. Kosambi
and reading his writings had made me realize the centrality of
historiography.
The Mary Talbot fellowship at lady Margaret hall (lMh),
oxford, in 1967 initiated the process more purposefully. My inte -
rest became better defined that year through discussions with
Professor arnaldo Momigliano, who ran a seminar on the theme
at University college, london. he introduced me to History and
Theory and other studies of the historiographies of early societies
and encouraged my interest in historiography. further explora-
tions resulted from conversations with eric hobsbawm, whom
I first met as an undergraduate when I attended his lectures at
Birkbeck college, london. i returned frequently to lMh and
espe cially enjoyed my conversations, as i still do, with susan
reynolds, and i am sorry that anne Whiteman and rosalie collie
are no longer around to discuss the contents of this book.
i gradually began reading texts of the ancient period from the
perspective of historiographical analysis. The reading has con-
ti nued over the last four decades with the discovery on each
x Preface
reading that there were many further genres of writing that could
be examined. There were of course ventures into other themes
during this time. nevertheless this reading remained constant, with
the publication of some occasional papers on historiography.
a period at cornell in 1974 where i gave some seminars on the
theme added other dimensions, particularly from the comments of
leighton hazlehurst and oliver Wolters. a nehru fellowship dur-
ing 1976 and 1977 provided the opportunity for some tangential
research which was published in 1984 as From Lineage to State.
The thesis of this earlier book is seminal for the first part of the
present one. a semester at Peradeniya University in sri lanka in
1978 led to discussions on Buddhist historiography with sirima
Kiribamune and the late leslie Gunawardana. These discussions
evoked earlier conversations with lakshman Pereira. i have also
had the benefit over the years of conversations on the subject with
the late frits staal, and with Thomas Trautmann, herman Kulke,
daud ali, and robert and sally Goldman.
an earlier version of this theme was given as the radhakrish-
nan lectures at oxford in 1987 and as a series of lectures at the
college de france in Paris in the same year. i also enjoyed trying
out my ideas on various colleagues in the centre for historical
studies of the Jawaharlal nehru University, which i hope they
did not regard as a terrible imposition. More recently, Kumkum
roy and Kunal chakrabarti have gallantly read and commented
on lengthy chapters, as has naina dayal, comments that have
helped me in organizing data and arguments. i would also like to
thank nivita Kakria, who helped to prepare the Bibliography and
the index. and special thanks to rukun advani, for his meticul-
ous editing, for the questions he asked which helped me clarify
what i was saying, as also f o r his patience and accommodation with
my ineptitude in handling the many problems i had with the
computer.
Work on other categories of texts as part of this project was
carried out later on an icssr fellowship in 1988–9 and a Bhabha
senior research fellowship in 1992–3. My ideas on this subject
then hibernated for a while whilst i published on other themes.
But the period of hibernation led to reformulations and new ways
of looking at the subject. The most recent period of intensive
Preface xi
reading and writing on early indian historiography, which helped
me formulate many thoughts included here, was as a fellow of
the nehru Memorial Museum and library, and at the library of
congress during 2003–4, and also when i held an indian council
for historical research (ichr) national fellowship, 2007–9.
i would like to apologize for the length of this book, but to some
extent this was required, given the widespread denial that early
india can provide evidence of a sense of history. This statement,
in fact, is what i came to see as largely irrelevant with the real-
ization that every society sees its past in a particular way, which
it may refer to as history or not, but which is relevant to under-
standing that society. The enjoyment in discovering nuances in
the texts that were new to me, and trying to follow up some of
the questions i was beginning to formulate, made me return again
and again to the theme.
i have not compared the various recensions of the texts, al-
though such comparisons have considerable historiographical
value, as it would have made the reading for and the writing of
this book impossibly long. it can in any case be better done by
examining the historiographical context of each text in greater
detail.
Given the length of the book it would doubtless help if i explain-
ed how the argument proceeds, although I can only do so briefly
at this stage. In the first chapter I have discussed the reasons for
it being said that there was no historical writing in early india.
The second chapter indicates what made it possible to question
this view and what i believe were the main historical traditions.
i thought it appropriate at this point to provide the direction of
my argument so as to facilitate the reading of my perspective on
the chosen texts. The remaining fifteen chapters discuss various
categories of texts, moving from embedded history to historical
texts, and which hopefully illustrate my argument. The concluding
chapter is an attempt to set out briefly what I understand of the
early indian historical tradition.
The subject considered here has immense variations because
of the variety of genres in which the texts are written. This
com plicates the argument since each genre has it own character-
istic way of recording the past. i have tried to draw out a series of
xii Preface
propositions which i hope will hold. Whether or not these proposi-
tions will be largely acceptable is perhaps not as important as the
real purpose of the book, namely, to create an interest in looking
at these questions and relating them to the texts of early india
since they provide new facets in its study.
Romila ThapaR
sepTembeR 2012
acknowledgements
Given the length of time it has taken to research and write
this book, some chapters inevitably draw on material
from earlier papers, and material from some parts of other
chapters has been used in writing papers on the subject.
The latter consist of a paper, “The Dāna-stuti hymns of the
Ṛgveda”, in s. Pollock (ed.), Epic and Argument in Sanskrit Liter­
ary History, delhi, 2010, 235–54, which draws on material from
chapter 3; and “chiefdoms and early Kingdoms in the Mahab-
harata” (forthcoming), which draws on material from chapter 4.
earlier versions of the theme of chapter 5 have been published
in “The ramayana: Theme and Variation”, in s.n. Mukherjee
(ed.), India: History and Thought, calcutta, 1982, 221-53. This was
republished in romila Thapar, Cultural Pasts, delhi, 2000,
647–579; it also borrows from my lecture Exile and the Kingdom,
Bangalore, 1978, and is partially reflected in “Epic and History:
Tradition, dissent and Politics in india”, Past and Present, 1989, 125,
3-26. it was developed further in “Variants as historical state-
ments: The rama-katha in early india”, in h.l. seneviratne (ed.),
The Anthropologist and the Native: Essays for Gananath Obeyese­
kere, florence, 2009, 349-94.
an earlier version of chapter 6 was published as “Genealogical
Patterns as Perceptions of the Past”, Studies in History, January–
June 1991, 7, 1, 1-36.
a paper published as “a Vaṃśāvalī from Chamba: Reflections
on a historical Tradition”, in India and Indology: Past, Present
and Future”, Kolkata, 2000, 581-92, draws on material used in
chapter 16.
xiv Acknowledgements
chapter 7 is a revised and expanded version of a paper on the
same subject entitled “inscriptions as historical Writing in early
india: Third century bc to sixth century ad”, in a. feldherr and
G. hardy (eds), The Oxford History of Historical Writing, vol. i:
Beginnings to ad 600, oxford, 2011, 577-600.
u
footnotes provide the minimum necessary information. Publica-
tion details of the sources cited are given in the Bibliography,
which is divided into two sections—primary sources and sec-
ondary sources. footnoted citations of primary sources provide
the source name, the editor’s name where required, the volume
number, and the pages or folios—e.g. Dasaratha-rājaputta, in
V. fausboll, The Jātaka, vol. Vi, 558; citations of secondary sour-
ces show the name of the author or editor, the book or essay title,
the volume number where required, and the page numbers—e.g.
e.J. rapson (ed.), The Cambridge History of India, vol. i, 57; h.h.
Wilson, “analysis of the Puranas”, JRAS, V, 61ff. In cases where
a source does not include the author’s name (making it impossible
to trace the item in the Bibliography), the footnote provides the
required bibliographical information—e.g. Nanyaura Plate A of
Dhaṅga, Ind. Ant., 1887, XVi, 201-4. full names of journals cited
in abbreviated form in the footnotes and Bibliography can be
found in the list of abbreviations below.
Sanskrit, Pāli, and Prākrit words, whether familiar or not, have
been transliterated using the standard forms of diacritical marks
and spellings—e.g. brāhmaṇa instead of brahmin. Place names in
current use do not have diacritics—e.g. Varanasi. Where nouns are
used as qualifiers—e.g. Puranic—they do not have diacritics.
abbreviations
ABORI Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute
AHR American Historical Review
AJIAI African Journal of the International African
Institute
Anth. SI Anthropological Survey of India
ARE Annual Report on Epigraphy
ASI Archaeological Survey of India
ASIAR Archaeological Survey of India—Annual
Reports
ASR Archaeological Survey Reports
ass anandasram sanskrit series
ASWI Archaeological Survey of Western India
BEFEO Bulletin de l’École Francaise d’Extreme­Orient
BEI Bulletin des Études Indiennes
BSOAS Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African
Studies
CII Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum
Contributions Contributions to Indian Sociology
CSSH Comparative Studies in Society and History
DED Dravidian Etymological Dictionary
EJVS Electronic Journal of Vedic Sudies
xvi Abbreviations
Ep. Ind. Epigraphia Indica
EPW Economic and Political Weekly
EW East and West
FEQ Far Eastern Quarterly
HR History of Religions
HT History and Theory
IAR Indian Archaeology—A Review
IESHR Indian Economic and Social History Review
IHQ Indian Historical Quarterly
IHR Indian Historical Review
IIJ Indo­Iranian Journal
Ind. Ant. Indian Antiquary
JAH Journal of African History
JAOS Journal of the American Oriental Society
JAS Journal of Asian Studies
JASB Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal
JBBRAS Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal
Asiatic Society
JESHO Journal of the Economic and Social History of
the Orient
JESI Journal of the Epigraphical Society of India
JIH Journal of Indian History
JIP Journal of Indian Philosophy
JOI Journal of the Oriental Institute (Baroda)
JRAIGBI Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute
of Great Britain and Ireland
JRAS Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society
JUB Journal of the University of Bombay
MAS Modern Asian Studies
Abbreviations xvii
MASI Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of India
P and P Past and Present
PTS Pāli Text Society
SLJH Sri Lanka Journal of the Humanities
ZDMG Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen
Gesellschaft

PART I
The Search for a
Historical Tradition

1
Searching for Early Indian
Historical Writing
1. The Diversity of Historical Traditions
Generalizations about the nature of a society or civilization,
when they take root, spread adventitiously. A couple of
hundred years ago it was stated that Indian civilization was
unique in that it lacked historical writing and, implicitly therefore,
a sense of history. With rare exceptions, there has been little at-
tempt since to examine this generalization. So entrenched is the
idea now that one almost hesitates to argue for a denial of this
denial of history. I would like to suggest that while there may not
in the early past have been historical writing in the forms cur-
rently regarded as belonging properly to the established genres
of history, many texts of that period reflect a consciousness of
history. Subsequently, there come into existence recognizable
forms of historical writing. Both varieties of texts—those which
reflect a consciousness of history and those which reveal forms
of historical writing—were used in early times to reconstruct the
past, and were drawn upon as a cultural, political, religious, or
other such resource at various times, in various situations, and
for a variety of reasons. To determine what makes for this his-
torical consciousness is not just an attempt to provide Indian
civilization with a sense of history, nor is it an exercise in abstract
research. My intention is to argue that, irrespective of the ques-
tion of the presence or absence of historical writing as such, an
4 The Past Before Us
understanding of the way in which the past is perceived, recorded,
and used affords insights into early Indian society, as it does for
that matter into other early societies.
Historical consciousness begins when a society shows con-
sciousness of both past and future, and does so by starting to re-
cord the past. “There is no more significant pointer to the character
of a society than the kind of history it writes or fails to write.”1
To argue over whether a particular society had a sense of history
or not on the basis of our recognition of the presence or absence
of a particular kind of historical tradition—one which has been
predetermined as being properly historical in perpetuity—seems
somewhat beside the point. It is more purposeful to try and ascer-
tain what each culture regards as its historical tradition and why
it does so; and to analyse its constituents and functions as well as
assess how it contends with competing or parallel traditions.
Historical traditions emanate from a sense of the past and in-
clude three aspects: first, a consciousness of past events relevant
to or thought of as significant by a particular society, the reasons
for the choice of such events being implicit; second, the placing
of these events in an approximately chronological framework,
which would tend to reflect elements of the idea of causality; and
third, the recording of these events in a form which meets the
requirements of that society.
Such a definition does not necessarily assume that political
events are more relevant than other sorts of events, although as
issues of power they tend to be treated as such. If the above defi-
nition is acceptable, then it can in fact be said that every society
has a concept of the past and that no society is a-historical. What
needs to be understood about a historical tradition is why certain
events are presumed to have happened and receive emphasis, and
why a particular type of record is maintained by the tradition.
A distinction may therefore be made between the existence of
a historical tradition and a philosophy of history. The latter may
follow the former. An awareness or confirmation of a philosophy
of history may make a historical narrative more purposeful. But
such a narrative does not thereby necessarily express greater
1 E.H. Carr, What is History?, 43.
Searching for Early Indian Historical Writing 5
historical veracity: narratives based on the theory that history is
determined by divine intervention are fired by purpose rather than
by the sifting of evidence. On the other hand, a historical tradition
may not concern itself with either divine purpose in history or
any other philosophical notion of history and yet be an authentic
record—if not of actual events, certainly of believed assumptions
about the past.
A historical tradition is created from the intellectual and so-
cial assumptions of a society. Consciously selected events are
enveloped in a deliberately created tradition which may only be
partially factual. An attempt to understand the tradition has to be-
gin by relating it to its social function, to ask the question: “What
purpose was served by creating and preserving this tradition?”
And, flowing from this, to see how a changing society made use
of the tradition.
Historical traditions emerge from and reflect their social con-
text, and the context may produce and extend to a broad range of
social forms. Within these forms, history is generally the record
of recognizable socio-political groups. Historical writing in such
cases tends to incorporate a teleological view, even if it seems to
be only a narrative of events. So, cultural symbols and stereotypes
have a role in delineating the past.
Studying a tradition involves looking at a number of indices:
first, the point in history at which the need to create and keep a
tradition becomes imperative; second, the social status of the
keepers of a tradition; third, whether the tradition was embedded
in sacred literature to ensure its continuity; fourth, the genres that
emerged in order to record the tradition independent of other liter-
ary forms; fifth, the social context in which the historical tradition
was composed and the changes that it underwent when society
itself changed; sixth, the audience for which any specific text
of that tradition was intended; seventh, the social groups which
used or manipulated the tradition, and their reasons for doing so;
for, above all, such a tradition legitimizes the present and gives
it sanction.
Together, these constitute the broad framework of analysis for
the texts and traditions that I examine in the book. Flowing from
the framework, certain key questions recur or are implicit during
6 The Past Before Us
the examination of a text or tradition: does it provide an instance
of a past authorship looking further back into a more distant past
in order to record or interpret that past? Can it be seen as outlining
a sense of time and/or a fresh chronology of past and sometimes
a future time? Can we detect in the material the deployment of
historical events or the construction of narratives that are at bot-
tom historical for hegemonic purposes or for cultural and political
legitimation?
u
The precise point at which a historical tradition emerges is often
difficult to determine. Initially, it may take an oral form. When,
with increased literacy, it comes to be written, its form may
change. Each generation prunes its historical tradition in accor-
dance with what it believes to be most worthy of preservation,
thus making it virtually impossible to locate the tradition’s starting
point. Examining the process of reformulation and pruning is, of
course, of interest in its own right. Every explanation of the past
is coloured by values existing at the time of the explanation. Peri-
odic explanations of the same event introduce new interpretations,
and these become the basis of historiography. The interpretations
are conditioned by the social and intellectual background of the
compiler of the tradition. Historical tradition, therefore, refers
to those aspects of the past, recorded orally or in texts, which are
consciously transmitted from generation to generation carrying
the sanction of antiquity and a believed historicity. Historical writ-
ing, when it emerges, can question that believed historicity. But
it need not always, and does not if it is building on such founda-
tions of belief.
The existence of historical traditions then relates less to his-
tori cal writing and more to historical consciousness. Such cons-
ciousness implies the need to refer to a past, perhaps even to
construct a past, for the past has a social function.2 Societies are
2 Freud argues that to construct is to make out what has been forgotten from
the traces left behind. He also raises the question of whether this is construction
Searching for Early Indian Historical Writing 7
aware of their past, or, more correctly, of their many pasts, and
communities have constantly to situate themselves in relation to
the past.3 The past is therefore a permanent dimension of human
identity, although its constructions and contents can change with
new definitions of identity. This is sometimes demonstrated by the
existence or appearance of variant readings of the past; it becomes
particularly apparent when there is an official version which dif-
fers from other versions. The meaning of such constructions is not
always apparent, requiring historians to reach behind the symbols.
Because the past is often constructed from the perspective of the
present it can become an attempt, sometimes subconsciously, to
intertwine the present with past society.
To ask why a society records an event, and in what form, in -
volves understanding some of the ideological debates of the
past. A tradition is created and taken forward, but it often needs
reformulation in accordance with later requirements. This process
then constitutes a historical tradition—although not necessarily
history. The narrative is given a chronological framework, and the
explanations of events assume some causal connections. Proving
the veracity of the record is at this point less crucial than exam-
ining the nature of its construction. History, or historical writing
in the forms that we now acknowledge as history, emerges from
such historical traditions.
A historical tradition has to claim that what it narrates are
events that happened in the past, a claim which differentiates
it from fiction. Such constructions of the past draw either on a
transmission which is said to have been handed down, or on wit-
nesses who, while writing about contemporary events, are also
aware of posterity as an audience. The tradition seeks to provide
origins, and it claims that its explanations are valid for all time.
But, as noted earlier, the tradition can change over time, partly on
account of the many ways in which the past is used in the present.
Historical consciousness is not therefore reflected whimsically
or reconstruction by making a comparison with archaeologists who reconstruct
from excavated evidence. S. Freud, “Constructions in Analysis”, 255–70.
3 E.J. Hobsbawm, “The Social Function of the Past: Some Questions”,
3–18.
8 The Past Before Us
via just any sort of construction of past times. The construction
has a function, it claims historicity, and it implies some degree
of causation.
Our reading of the nature of historical perceptions manifest
within a tradition also has to relate to a range of evidence on the
society contemporary with the period of the perceptions: else
our reading will be arbitrary. The perspectives and perceptions
that constitute a historical tradition can be juxtaposed to observe
how some either conflict with others, or possibly incorporate and
reformulate them.
u
To reiterate: it is not my intention to prove the historical authenti-
city of what is being narrated about the past in early Indian texts.
Therefore, whether or not early Indian society produced historical
writing of a kind that we are now familiar with is not my ques-
tion. My concern is with trying to read some of the perceptions
of historical consciousness in the texts from early Indian society.
These, I suggest, can provide clues to how that society viewed its
past and why it did so. Such a project can enlarge our understand-
ing of how their historical perceptions reflect the societies of
that time.
This kind of inquiry may also help us understand the texts that
purport to represent the past, why they took the form they did, and
what within the past was of central importance to their authors.
I would like to explain why the supposed absence of a sense of
history in these texts is not a significant question.
Three kinds of enquiries may seem appropriate at this point.
One is that since historical traditions emanating from diverse cul-
tures will inevitably differ, comparisons between traditions have
to be made more precisely than they have tended to be. Historical
writing is in fact better viewed initially within its historiographical
context, for it varies from one society to another ranging from
being either apparent or minimal. Another aspect pertains to
why it was necessary for historians to argue, in the last couple of
centuries, that Indian civilization lacked a sense of history. Even
more important, and what is in effect the most substantial, has to
Searching for Early Indian Historical Writing 9
do with the nature of representations of the past in the texts of the
early Indian historical tradition.
2. Recent Evaluations of Early European
Historical Traditions
The obsession in the nineteenth century with history as central to
civilization was derived from the conviction that every branch of
knowledge had to have a history. History was the path into that
knowledge, whether it was geology or botany or astronomy or any
other. Therefore, a people without history were a people without
knowledge. Notions of the history of a civilization also derived
from humanist traditions which maintained that there was a uni-
fied European identity central to European thought. This identity
was said to show continuity from the Greeks to modern Europe,
and was meant to be accessible in European literature, especially
in texts that pertained to the past.4 Similar notions of identity,
supposedly unifying all societies, were sought in the historical
writing of other civilizations. Such views have undergone some
reconsiderations in recent times. The views as well as the recon-
siderations are pertinent to the history of historical writing.
The discussion of historical writing in ancient societies begins
by convention with the Greeks. In effect, there are earlier traditions
in Mesopotamia. In China, such writing was based on the records
of scribes and culminated in the work of Sima Qian, who in the
second century ad records events that he considers important
and includes biographies of persons on whom he bestows fame
whenever he thinks fit. As with the Greeks and Indians, cosmo­
logical time in his work is cyclical. Records of the past are treated
as a major source of knowledge and were essential to the training
of bureaucrats and civil servants. The editing of various annals
was a way of pruning history. Characterized by concrete analogic al
thinking, Sima Qian’s work draws on questions of ethics and caus-
ation.5 Another view maintains that China had historical writ ing
4 A. Ahmad, “Orientalism and After”, 98–116; idem, In Theory: Classes,
Nations, Literatures.
5 C.C. Huang, “The Defining Characteristics of Chinese Historical Think-
ing”, 180–8.
10 The Past Before Us
but was preoccupied with didacticism, and therefore less with a
critical spirit and historical consciousness. The argument is that
the difference between the “past” and “history” is not apparent.6
The Greco-Roman tradition was viewed as quite independent
of antecedents, although more recent scholarship suggests pos-
sible traces of Mesopotamian ideas in the formulation of the early
Greek tradition. Mesopotamian king-lists and chronicles of a later
period are sometimes viewed as precursors of Greek writing. The
authenticity of the king-lists, or for that matter the epic of Gilga-
mesh, has been under scrutiny. The Sumerian historical tradition
has some roots in “omen literature”, with divination based on the
entrails of sacrificed animals, the reading of which was said to be
linked to historical events. Parallels can be seen in the Chinese
reading omens from “oracle bones”.
Greco-Roman writing on the past, and to some degree on con-
temporary times, was said to be historical because it was believed
to be factual and drew on rational explanations. Recent analytical
studies of Greek and Roman historiography suggest that, in their
representations of the past, history and fiction were interwoven.
The term historia in Greek referred originally to an enquiry into
a matter, perhaps controversial or emotionally charged.7 Gradu-
ally, this grew into a literary genre, showing the predominance
within it of narrative. It has been said that “history was not a
philosophical problem to the Greeks and the Romans”, and that
“the idea of history then, was not understood as being dependent
upon or derivative from the idea of time. Moreover there was not
a universal Greek view of time as a link . . .”8 It has also been
argued that “if one starts by distinguishing between Oriental or
mythical or mythologizing historiography and a rational and sci-
entific historiography which strictly sticks to sources and facts,
it is questionable whether Thucydides can be counted among the
latter.”9 This may be a somewhat harsh judgement, but it is all
6 Q.E. Wang, “Is There a Chinese Mode of Historical Thinking? A Cross-
Cultural Analysis”, 201–9.
7 F.M. Cornford, Thucydides Mythhistoricus.
8 G.A. Press, “History of the Development of the Idea of History in Anti-
quity”, 280–96.
9 W. den Boer, “Greco-Roman Historiography in its Relation to Biblical and
Modern Thinking”, 60–75.
Searching for Early Indian Historical Writing 11
the same worth considering. Herodotus, for example, did not sift
fact from myth in his comments about Persia and India. It is often
forgotten that Herodotus was frequently accused of lying, in part
because he used the oral tradition quite extensively. This was not
unusual, there being no precise test of factuality at that time.10
As Momigliano has pointed out, later writers such as Manetho
and Plutarch did not accept Herodotus’s statements.11 This is an
early example of inconsistencies between oral and textual data
which are now recognized as inconsistencies of both genre and
content.
Paul Veyne makes the point that the Greeks did not differentiate
between primary and secondary sources,12 and this would apply
to many writings from early societies. History here is born as
tradition and not as having to be built up from source material.
Herodotus did not know the Persian of the sources that he refers
to. Nor were histories of ancient times interested in theories of
explanation. These were part of a general notion of causes, even if
a rather subconscious part. History involved collating information,
and events were judged by internal criteria. The citing of sources
at this time was, ironically, more important to theology.
Texts of these ancient traditions tend to focus on recent events
which were treated from the perspective of contemporary con-
cerns. Collingwood’s statement bears reflection not only with
reference to Greek writing but also to the historical perceptions of
many past cultures: “One might almost say that in ancient Greece
there were no historians in the sense in which there were artists
and philosophers; there were no people who devoted their lives to
the study of history; the historian was only the autobiographer of
his generation and autobiography is not a profession.”13 Thucy-
dides did at least emphasize the significance of political events
and evaluate premises as the basis for information.
Records from the ancient European world gave attention to
genealogy, causality, sequential narrative, and time-reckoning.
10 A. Momigliano, “Greek Historiography”, 1–23.
11 A. Momigliano, “The Place of Herodotus in the History of Historiogra-
phy”, 1–13.
12 P. Veyne, Did the Greeks Believe in their Myths?
13 R.G. Collingwood, The Idea of History, 26.
12 The Past Before Us
The Greek perception of their own past and identity was tied to
the projection of the “Other”—the non-Greek-speaking barbar-
ian, living in a different territory with a different ethnicity and
culture. This made the consciousness of claiming a historical
past more acute.
Polybius and other Roman historians were concerned with
rhetorical preoccupations and political motives. The latter took the
form of imperial history in later writing. In recounting the past,
Roman writing was more closely tied to the requirements of the
state and reflects the perception of the upper echelons of society
because of the nature of what it selects from the past.14
3. Europe and its Christian Historical
Traditions
Some have argued that to the Greek mind, as against the Jewish
and Christian, history was of minor interest. Jewish writing was
contemporary with the Roman and there was occasionally an ap-
propriation of the earlier tradition into the Jewish format.15 With
the coming of history infused by Judaism and Christianity, begin-
ning with Eusebius and Jerome and culminating with Augustine,
over the third to the fifth centuries ad, the notion of history from
European antiquity shaping the present was virtually set aside. The
fallout effect of this can be seen in histories of medieval European
times, such as that of Bede in the eighth century. History was now
a record of the power of God and of the actions of God in human
affairs, with divinity guiding destiny and the reflection of both be-
ing presumably through the Christian Church. Based on the Bible,
eschatology was an essential feature, providing teleology from the
Garden of Eden to Judgement Day, and incorporating the latter as
the ultimate end of history. A distinctive historical tradition also
emerges when there is a contestation with the views of the Other,
and in the case of Church histories there were many Others, the
14 A. Momigliano, “Polybius and Posidonius”, in idem, Alien Wisdom: The
Limits to Hellenism.
15 A. Momigliano, The Classical Foundations of Modern Historiography,
29.
Searching for Early Indian Historical Writing 13
Jewish historical tradition being among these. Competing histories
represent an indirect way of staking a claim to the resources of
society.16 A new narrative of the past which competes with the one
that is dominant is usually a discursive strategy by a social group
to lay claim to power.
Ecclesiastical history was different from the Greco­Roman as it
presupposed revelation, and history was made subservient to rev-
elation. The destiny of man now lay in the actions of the Church.
Eusebius made a distinction between the history of the state and
of the Church. The latter drew from aspects of earlier Jewish
historical writing, such as that of Josephus of the first century ad,
where revelation and the command of God were intrinsic to re-
cording the past. Given that the God was a single jealous God,
revelation was in essence an unquestionable statement. Church
history was supported by the patronage of the aristocracy and of
those of learning, and by monasteries which had become powerful
institutions. When monasteries emerged as centres of authority,
they tended to undermine secular authority.17 Chronicles of regions
fed the importance of political history, but in them power was
often seen through the prism of the Church. These also referred
themselves to certain concepts of succession—both of kings and
bishops; of orthodoxy and deviations; and of quoting sources as
testimony to a statement. But above all, history was intended to
support dogma.
Apart from ecclesiastical history in medieval Europe, there were
texts on the histories of aristocratic families. These narrated the
antecedents of elite groups. Geoffrey of Monmouth in the twelfth
century traced ruling families back to the heroes of the Roman
epics such as Aeneas. Joachim of Fiore of the same period empha-
sized chronological placements and discussed events pertaining
to the theory of the six ages, or time periods, as envisaged at that
point, sometimes given a theological dimension. Chronologies
and concepts of time had been important to both Augustine in De
Civitate Dei (fourth century) and to Bede’s History of the English
Church and People (ninth century). Although not divorced from
16 F. Furedi, Mythical Past, Elusive Future.
17 A. Momigliano, “Christianity and the Decline of the Roman Empire”.
14 The Past Before Us
theology, there was nevertheless by the twelfth century a gradual
breaking away from it.18 Chronicles and biographies moved in a
more secular direction.
Historiography now becomes important to Europe because the
Judeo-Christian religions required the authenticating of certain
traditions. This made history decisive. Subsequently, this pattern
of history was to influence the provision of a community identity
to the nations of Europe as they emerged. Notions of physical
and biological evolution as explanations simultaneously sought
parallels in historical data.19
A departure from involving only the Church in history writing
was introduced in Renaissance writing, which shows an initial
focus on Greek and Latin texts encouraging the possibility of re-
connecting with this past. The Renaissance view of history from
the fifteenth century results in attempts at a continuous narrative
from Greek times. Antiquarianism, as well as the visibility of
Greco-Roman remains, strengthened the ideas of continuity and
connectedness. It took a more secular form with the Enlightenment
a couple of centuries later, rational analysis and human activity
being seen as the pivot of the universe. Every human activity had a
history. The intellectuals of the Renaissance and Enlightenment—
Bodin, Bacon, Descartes, and Vico—were dismissive of earlier
Classical history, instead emphasizing empirical evidence and
rational explanation. A new periodization was sought, historical
veracity underlined, and the earlier insistence on revealed truth
subordinated to reason. This encouraged the primacy of the idea
of progress wherein Judeo-Christian teleology was converted to
a secular one. These changes allowed for what was to follow, with
explanations of how and why events occurred in the past becoming
the major enterprise of historians.
What needs underlining is the change in European historiogra-
phy at the point where history, as constituted in the Greco-Roman
tradition, was substantially diverted to other functions in Christian
Europe. Generalizations can hardly be made about a single, uni-
fied sense of history in the West. Furthermore, the understanding
18 R.W. Southern, “Aspects of the European Tradition of Historical Writing”,
159–79.
19 A. Momigliano, “History and Biography”, 155–84.
Searching for Early Indian Historical Writing 15
among historians of what constitutes a historical consciousness
is different now, as compared to what it was a century ago. This
change is also of significance when we look at Indian texts. The
same evidence can be read differently, depending on the nature of
the enquiry, and the question then is of evaluating the reading.
4. The Islamic Traditions
In Europe the change was from the Greco-Roman, to medieval
Christianity, to the Enlightenment. Each of these historiographies
had many strands. What is often referred to as “Islamic histori-
ography” also had diverse strands, of which at least three can be
recognized. Historical writing in Arabic drew on Islamic thought,
although again not barring the imprint of other prior ways of look-
ing at the past—such as the Hebraic and Christian—which were
incorporated into the Islamic. Statements supposedly emanating
from divine sources were taken as true and therefore treated as
authoritative, and there had to be a clear chain of transmission.
Persian historical writing carried a different legacy, that of the
Zoroastrian and Manichaean prior to the Islamic. It hinted at a
more secular history, with enquiry holding a respectable position in
readings of the past. The Turks and the Afghans, as the third com-
ponent, inherited Shamanism and Buddhism before incorporating
Islam into their cultural legacy. Such diversity produced history
with variable nuances, and these were important, for example, to
the internalizing of Islamic historiography in India.
The better-known texts of Islamic historiography are contem-
porary with the later Church histories of Europe, but they emerged
independently. Among the Persian histories the most familiar is the
Shahnameh of Firdausi, written in the eleventh century and narrat-
ing the history of Persia. There is much in this tradition taken from
oral sources, as well as those of Zoroastrianism, to reconstruct
pre-Islamic history, and the heroes here are those well known from
other sources.20 There is a relatively smooth transition to Islamic
times, the narrative continuing unbroken. Firdausi sought the
20 J.S. Meisami, Persian Historiography to the End of the Twelfth Century,
107ff.; K. Yamamoto, The Oral Background of Persian Epics: Story-telling and
Poetry.
16 The Past Before Us
patronage of Mahmud of Ghazni in the early eleventh century. But
Mahmud was not a generous patron, so Firdausi left the Ghazni
court and his glorification of pre­Islamic heroes was not objected
to. His close contemporary was the scribe Abu’l Fazl-i-Bayhaqi,
whose account, the Ta’rikh-i-Bayhaqi, includes references to
sources and judgements on morality and good government. The
role of the king is idealized, especially when he consults advisors.
A major aspect of kingship is seen as the transference of power
through dynastic succession. Unlike Firdausi, but not surprising
in a scribe of that time, Bayhaqi’s language carries the imprint of
Arabic learning.21
Associated with this period and with India is the Tahqiq-i-Hind
of Al-Biruni, a study of the culture of India. Al-Biruni, visiting
India in the eleventh century, writes that Hindus do not pay much
attention to the historical order of things and are careless in nar-
rating the historical succession of their rulers.22 He was unaware
of the historiographies of Indian society and was seeking a paral-
lel to the Islamic: his comments follow from a partial knowledge
of the texts available. Al-Biruni came from a society in Central
Asia that had a strong pre-Islamic Buddhist culture: he mentions
the śramaṇas/shamaniyyas as important to the religion of India
and hostile to the brāhmaṇas. Yet his conversations seem to have
been limited to brāhmaṇa ritual specialists and a few others know-
ledgeable about astronomy and the calendar. This knowledge was
not a source of history. He distinguishes between chronology as
given in the Purāṇas, which was more fantasy than astronomical
calculation, and texts on astronomy based on mathematics. But
the distinction is not maintained in his discussion of chronology.
Had he conversed with scribes at the royal courts he might have
come to know about inscriptions as royal annals, and their focus
on dynastic succession as well as their careful calculation of
chronology. Had he looked into the śramaṇa tradition—that of the
Buddhists and Jainas—he would have found narratives different
from the Purāṇas, with a stronger flavour of the historical.
Al­Biruni’s insufficient awareness of the writing of history in
21 M.R. Waldman, Towards a Theory of Historical Narrative, 109–20.
22 Alberuni’s India, II.10–11.
Searching for Early Indian Historical Writing 17
forms other than the ones he was familiar with is a problem which
also lay at the root of other commentators who commented on the
lack of histories. Much the same can be said of the seventeenth-
century writer Ferishtah’s comments on Indian history. He based
himself largely on writings from the courts of the sultans ruling
in India and did not care to acquaint himself with the earlier tradi-
tion. In a sense, a tradition of ignorance or limited understanding
had come into being in relation to historiography in the Indian
context, and writers within it such as Al-Biruni and Ferishtah
were the forerunners of a similar position later taken by European
commentators. What seems interesting is not that they both say
the same thing about a lack of history, but that they both limit
themselves to consulting only the brāhmaṇas—and, moreover,
largely only ritual specialists.
The best-known historian associated with Islam was a Tunisian,
Ibn Khaldun, who wrote the Kitabal’ibar in the fourteenth century,
in Arabic. The introduction to this book, the Muqaddimah, is what
is generally quoted.23 The work is different from most Persian
histories. For Ibn Khaldun, history is about social organization, of
which the best form is civilization, which envelops the commu-
nity and royal authority, and which has to contradict varieties
of untruths. He concedes that social factors may underlie some
historical changes.
u
Given this diversity, when we consider Sultanate and Mughal his-
toriographies in India we cannot assume they emerge from a single
source conveniently labelled “Islamic history”, since in fact they
combine elements of the Islamic and broader Indian heritage.
The historiographies most frequently taken as a measure of
historical writing proper are the Judaeo-Christian and Islamic.
These have a clear eschatology of the beginning and end of the
human story with a teleology built in it, and both view time as
largely linear. The others, in which this is not so clearly evident,
are the Greco-Roman, the Chinese, and the Indian. In these there
23 F. Rosenthal, Ibn Khaldun: The Muqaddimah.
18 The Past Before Us
is eschatology, but not as well defined, and time takes various
forms—linear, spiral, cyclic. The Greco-Roman, which is seen
as foundational to European historiography, has little in common
with the Judaeo-Christian. Given this variegated background of
historiographies, the colonial judgement on history in India seems
either simplistic or devious.
5. Colonialism and Early Indian History
In the foregoing discussion on historical writing in early India,
the imprint of colonial formulations was the bedrock of the argu-
ment, as it was of other aspects of reconstructing the past. It would
be useful to consider how these formulations were arrived at,
and how historians today would reformulate the questions when
analysing the data.
The search for indigenous histories of early India began in the
eighteenth century. European scholars, viewing historical litera-
ture as a distinct category recording the past, looked in vain for
recognizable histories from the Sanskrit tradition. Indian culture,
and particularly the Sanskrit articulation of what came to be called
Hindu culture, was defined therefore as a­historical. William
Jones, the leading Indologist of the late eighteenth century, work-
ing at Calcutta suspected that some texts, even when they included
the myths and legends of the Hindus, probably contained the core
of a history:
That no Hindu nation but the Cashmerian, have [sic] left us regular
histories in their ancient language, we must ever lament; but from
the Sanskrit literature, which our country has the honour of having
unveiled, we may still collect some rays of historical truth . . . The
numerous Puranas, Itihasas, or poems mythological and heroic are
completely in our power; and from them we may recover some dis-
figured but valuable pictures of ancient manners and governments;
while the popular tales of the Hindus, in prose and verse, contain
fragments of history . . .24
Attempts were made to compare these texts with others from
the ancient world as it was assumed that links would give credence
24 W. Jones, “On the Mystical Poetry of the Persians and Hindus”, 165ff.
Searching for Early Indian Historical Writing 19
to their historical authenticity.25 Most scholars, however, tended to
dismiss these narratives as entirely fanciful and pointed out that
the texts showed little concern for an accurate record of the past. It
was agreed that the only exception was the Rājataraṅgiṇī of Kalhaṇa,
a twelfth­century history of Kashmir. This work was regarded
as atypical among Sanskrit texts because it was a history in the
conventional sense, and for that reason much acclaimed by those
searching for such ancient histories.
It might be worth keeping in mind that the word “myth” was
used casually in these writings, with little attempt to define it or
distinguish it from history. Myth relates the world of deities to
that of humans, and some divine interventions as incarnations are
occasionally introduced into the narrative. The claim that some
kings were incarnations of particular deities was probably more
for emphasis and was doubtless not universally accepted. Myth
also refers to a remote past, although it is relevant to the present
in terms of the message that it carries. Mythical time therefore can
be vast, even unending. Myths are allegories and riddles whereas
narrations claiming to be historical tend to keep such matters to
a minimum.
A century later MacDonell’s searing remark, “early India wrote
no history because it never made any”,26 was modified by Rapson,
who subscribed to the general view: “In all the large and varied
literatures of the Brahmans, Jains and Buddhists there is not to
be found a single work which can be compared to the Histories in
which Herodotus recounts the struggle between the Greeks and
the Persians or to the Annals in which Livy traces the growth and
progress of Roman power.”27 However, Rapson goes on to add,
“But this is not because the people of India had no history . . . We
know from other sources that the ages were filled with stirring
events; but these events found no systematic record.” Comparisons
with the Chinese chronicles of Sima Qian and the Arabic writings
of Ibn Khaldun or even the Biblical genealogies, not to mention
25 W. Jones, “On the Chronology of the Hindus”, 111ff.; idem, “On the Gods
of Greece, Italy and India”; idem, “Third Anniversary Discourse”, 221ff.
26 A.A. MacDonell, History of Sanskrit Literature, 11.
27 E.J. Rapson (ed.), The Cambridge History of India, vol. I, 57.
20 The Past Before Us
Greco-Roman texts, strengthened, if only by contrast, the axiom
that Indian society denied history.
In the supposed absence of a systematic record, the intellec-
tual premises for the reconstruction of early Indian history by
European scholars were drawn from contemporary European
historiography. Awareness of evidence, interest in causation, and
a premium on chronology together with sequential narrative were
features of the Renaissance sense of the past; together these repre-
sented a departure from the historiography of medieval times with
its focus on the activities of the Christian Church.28 The colonial
perception of the Indian past represented a break, therefore, with
the indigenous traditions of earlier times. These included not only
the Puranic and the Sramanic but also the Islamic historical tradi-
tions. The last had sought to link local dynasties of the Sultanates
and Mughals with the wider framework of Islamic historiogra-
phy, but had also, on occasion, included mention of elements of
the past as given in Puranic texts. Some of this hybrid history had
seeped into the origin myths of ruling families which, in fact, had
no links with the Turks or the Arabs, as is evident from some of
the myths of Rajput clans recorded by Tod. Even more remote to
colonial views was the possible link between a sense of history in
Sanskrit sources with the new colonial reconstruction of Indian
history, for presuppositions among colonial historians about the
relevance of the past to the present were, as I hope to show, far too
different.
Attempts were made to reconstruct early Indian history by
focusing on chronology and sequential narrative. The acclamation
given to the identification by William Jones of Sandracottos with
Candra gupta, the Mauryan king, thus linking him with Alexan-
der, shows the kind of concern with chronology among those who
were probing the Indian past.29 This became the bedrock of Indian
chronology for those times (it has been superseded by the more
pre cise reference to the contemporary Hellenistic kings in an
28 P. Burke, The Renaissance Sense of the Past.
29 S.N. Mukherjee, Sir William Jones: A Study in Eighteenth Century British
Attitudes to India, 80–90; O.P. Kejariwal, The Asiatic Society of Bengal and the
Discovery of India’s Past.
Searching for Early Indian Historical Writing 21
inscription of Aśoka). It was also additional evidence for the theory
that Greek and Sanskrit were cognate languages. Greek writers
such as Megasthenes confirming the centrality of genealogies as a
record of the past seemed less significant, because chronology in
Indian sources was said to have been so disguised by the fantasies
of the brāhmaṇas that it was almost impossible to unravel it.
Yet, on the other hand, much effort went into endless attempts
at correlating Indian data with Biblical and Mesopotamian chro-
nology. The figures quoted for the enormous time periods of the
yugas and the kalpas were tested for factuality and naturally found
wanting in comparison with modern calculations. So enthusiastic
was this effort that forgeries by local pandits, obviously produced
to please the new masters, were the basis of an equally enthusiastic
investigation.30 But the attempted correlations with Biblical gene-
alogies had turned out even more fanciful than the theories of the
brāhmaṇas.31 Some went further afield and quoted Arab sources
in an attempt to rationalize early Indian chronology.32 Parallels
between Old Testament chronology and Hindu traditions were
pointed out, but these did not constitute a history.
The search, therefore, was for a history of India devised along
the lines drawn by the humanist version of Enlightenment histo-
riography which would reveal the identity of Indian civilization.
Officers of the East India Company constituted the largest propor-
tion of scholars working on India at the time. Their informants
were learned brāhmaṇas whom they tapped for information
on law and religion. It has been said that Jones’ attempt was to
domesticate the Orient through control over its knowledge. Thus,
proposing the difference between the Orient and the Occident
would establish the superiority of the latter.33 His informants
30 F. Wilford, “An Essay on the Sacred Isles in the West, with Other Essays
Connected with That Work”, 245ff.
31 F. Wilford, “On the Chronology of the Hindus”, 241–95; J. Bentley, “Re-
marks on the Principal Eras and Dates of the Ancient Hindus”, 315–93; idem,
“On the Hindu System of Astronomy”, 195–249; W. Jones, “On the Chronology
of the Hindus”, 111ff.; S. Davis, “On the Indian Cycle of Sixty Years”, 289ff.
32 M. Anquetil du Perron, Recherches Historiques et Geographiques sur
l’Inde, vol. II.
33 E. Said, Orientalism, 77.
22 The Past Before Us
emphasized the centrality of the texts important to Brahmanism,
such as the Dharmaśāstras and Vedas, and to a lesser extent the
Purāṇas, the latter regarded as second-order knowledge. For
example, Colebrooke worked primarily with Maithil brāhmaṇas,
reputed to be among the most orthodox, who would have urged
their foreign rulers to concentrate only on ritually important brah-
manical texts.
Other systems of knowledge emanating from non-brāhmaṇa
sources, including the Buddhist and Jaina, were initially not given
much importance. This was partly because the early Orientalists
lacked familiarity with these texts, there being no Buddhist monks
or lay persons in India to introduce Buddhistic texts, and also
because these, being regarded as inferior branches of Hinduism,
were not thought to be a mainstream of information. Buddhism
was barely recognized as important to India since it was no longer
a formal religion of significance in the land of its origin. Together
with Jainism, it was at best treated as a variant belief system within
the larger fold of what came to be called Hinduism. That these
could earlier have been independent but interacting systems of
knowledge, let alone alternative systems, was hardly conceded.
The work of Jones, and similar studies recorded in the Asiatic
Researches, were later to encourage the discipline of comparative
philology, especially in European universities. H.H. Wilson who
later held the Chair in Sanskrit at Oxford, was also part of this
tradition and ventured further in his studies, as for example in the
work which he did on the Viṣṇu Purāṇa. The attempt was to give
order to the multiplicity of beliefs that were being described as
“Hinduism”.
Giving primacy to Hinduism had many reasons. European atti-
tudes to Indian Islam as a major non-Hindu culture were mediated
by the perspective of it being a Semitic religion with a heritage
in part common to Christianity (though alien nevertheless). This
was reinforced by Europe’s experience of confronting Islam in the
second millennium ad, going back to the Crusades. Islam in India
was seen once again as a political rival. But, from the point of view
of the Christian missions, the major competition came from what
was perceived as the even more alien religion of Hinduism. Doubt-
less the exotica and the incomprehension of a religion so different
Searching for Early Indian Historical Writing 23
from the Semitic must also have been intriguing and challeng -
ing—as it still is. This seems one reason why attempts were made
to try and induct it into a recognizable framework, and to provide it
with the kind of history that would make it less alien, and therefore
easier to comprehend as well as confront.34
The initial reading was mainly of texts that provided informa-
tion on Hindu law and religion, the latter defined by deities, cults,
sects, and philosophical schools. What this scholarship brought
into prominence was largely a limited, upper-caste Hinduism. The
more essential features of its history, namely, the tension or the
changes implicit in the evolution of sects, or their relations with
particular castes, was of less interest. The concern with religion
encouraged the reading of texts for whatever may have been their
theological approach, rather than for discovering the relationship
between sects and society—which would have involved some
recognition of how these texts recorded the past.
At the same time, William Jones referred to the three great
nations of Asia as the Hindus, the Arabs, and the Tartars.35 It is
significant that he used the term “nation”, for nations require a his-
tory. Jones was using the word more in its contemporary sense, as a
synonym for “people”, rather than in its current association with a
state. Did the concept of a Hindu “nation” influence the search for
a particular kind of Hindu history? Perhaps Hindu identity was of
interest because it was non-Semitic and represented, numerically,
the larger segment of the Indian people. Jones’ emphasis on the
study of non-Semitic cultures was important to his theories of the
monogenesis of cultures and languages. Thus, the study of Indian
history in itself also became a search for the empirical “Truth”,
and attempts were made to unravel the legends. The definition
of a Hindu identity was significant to these considerations, even
if such an identity was difficult to isolate from the sources, and
despite this identity being constructed almost entirely from a brah-
manical perspective. The very idea of seeking a subcontinental
34 R. Thapar, “Imagined Religious Communities: Ancient History and
the Modern Search for a Hindu Identity”, in idem, Interpreting Early India,
60–88.
35 W. Jones, “On the Gods of Greece, Italy and India”, 221ff.
24 The Past Before Us
history limited to Sanskrit sources, and expecting such sources
to hold a view of the past similar to the current European, does
seem somewhat meaningless.
6. The View of the English Utilitarians
A different reconstruction of early Indian history, based on a
new set of premises, arose from Utilitarian thought, also in the
nineteenth century. Utilitarian views of historical origins and ex-
planations referring to India set aside the need for a tradition of
historical writing, or, for that matter, even a concern for the past
in the indigenous tradition. The new scholarship again drew its
inspiration from European ideological debates and perceptions.
Thus, a familiarity with the intellectual history of Europe in the
nineteenth century became a precondition for understanding these
new interpretations of Indian history. The supposed non-existence
of historical writing was explained as an outcome of the nature of
Indian society. Both the theory and the explanations became an im-
perative of colonial policy in a changing relationship between the
colonial power and the colony.36
The denial of a sense of history in the colony was also implicit
in the attempt to explain the Indian past as one conforming to the
theory of Oriental Despotism. This is evident in what has been re-
ferred to as the hegemonic text on Indian history, James Mill’s
The History of British India, published between 1818 and 1823.37
This was the first attempt to survey the past, encompassing what
was known and written in English of the history of British India as
a continuous narrative. Mill’s view became seminal to interpreting
Indian history, in particular his tripartite division of Indian history
into Hindu and Muslim civilizations, and the period of British rule.
Hindu civilization was for Mill not only irrational, backward, and
stagnant, but registered no change at all,38 a view which reached
36 R. Thapar, “Ideology and the Interpretation of Early Indian History”, in
idem, Interpreting Early India, 1–22.
37 R. Inden, “Orientalist Construction of India”, 401–46; idem, Imagining
India.
38 J. Mill, The History of British India, vol. I, 33ff.
Searching for Early Indian Historical Writing 25
the more abstract levels of historical generalization in Hegel’s
comments on Indian history.
The despotic state was thought to be the characteristic politi-
cal form in India since the beginning. For Mill, change was only
meaningful if it was compatible with his definition of progress,
a teleological movement with history as its narrative. The static
character of Indian society, as in all oriental despotisms, needed
to be broken by introducing change. British administration could
bring in change through legislation. These views were in part the
reflection of a colonial policy that sought an interpretation of the
Indian past which would serve to back its political agenda. Mill’s
History was also an attempt to present a pan-Indian view, even
though what he knew was limited to British India.
Mill’s History critiqued earlier British Orientalist views sym-
pathetic to Indian civilization, more so those associated with the
Asiatic Society at Calcutta. It has been argued that Mill saw Jones’
view of the Orient as the product of undisciplined imagination,
dangerous on epistemological and political grounds.39 Mill’s His-
tory was an attempt at defining a new idiom for the empire. His
project was different from that of the Orientalists, who were seek-
ing parallels in India to European ideas of the past and insisting
on understanding the indigenous law and the social articulation
of India. Mill’s notion of empire was, of course, modelled on the
Roman. But because the British empire required a particular kind
of economic link with its colonies, his emphasis, and that of those
who thought like him, was gradually less on campaigns to acquire
land and revenue and more on restructuring the colonial economy
to enhance the wealth of the colonial power. Mill also realized that
support for what was viewed as indigenous law could result in
the endorsement of a position far more conservative in India than
was practised all the time.
Mill rejected Jones’ contention that historical material could be
culled from the epics and other Indian sources. The Orientalists
were accused of legitimizing themselves by deploying indigenous
idioms. It was not seen that they were doing so through their own
interpretation of the indigenous idiom, which resulted in their
39 J. Majeed, Ungoverned Imaginings, 4ff.
26 The Past Before Us
arriving at a version not necessarily indigenous. Mill’s views on
India also ran parallel at some points with those of contemporary
British missionaries who proposed radical change, except that the
missionaries believed that the more effective solution to Indian
backwardness was conversion to Christianity.40
As a historian Mill saw himself in the role of a judge, familiar-
izing himself with the pros and cons of the argument and pronoun-
cing judgement while keeping a distance. This legal perspective
not only validated the distance from Indian society evident in his
history, but also excused his lack of first­hand knowledge about the
country. As a metaphor, this legalistic distancing of the historian
from his subject came to be widely upheld by other historians
writing on India, both British and Indian. It is curious that the two
nineteenth-century protagonists in the debate on the interpretation
of India’s past, James Mill and later Max Müller, each support-
ing opposed theories and adhering to different political loyalties,
declined to visit India and never experienced its lived reality.
In 1840 H.H. Wilson annotated Mill’s History, and in doing so
made a spirited defence of Jones. Strangely, he did not attempt an
alternative history but was content to incorporate his defence of
Jones in the annotations. The Orientalists of the nineteenth century,
as against those of the eighteenth, despite their meticulous research
into texts of the ancient period, did not feel the need to effectively
criticize the views on early Indian society held by Utilitarians
and others who supported imperialist interpretations.41 It looks as
though by about 1840 there had come about a reconsideration in
imperial attitudes as to how India was to be governed. This change
resulted in greater sympathy for Mill’s view than could be openly
expressed among those concerned with the study of India.
Mill believed in legislating change, and therefore any society
which did not conform at least minimally to the laws govern-
ing contemporary European society—which for him were po-
tenti ally the criterion of progress—would have to be forced to
change through new laws. These would convert barbarism into
40 A. Embree, Charles Grant and the Evangelicals.
41 D.N. Lorenzen, “Imperialism and the Historiography of Ancient India”,
84–102.
Searching for Early Indian Historical Writing 27
civilization and progress. If the Greeks cultivated history and the
Hindus had failed to, then the latter failed the test of civilization.
Some Orientalist scholars, such as Max Müller, were projecting
utopias in their description of the nineteenth-century village
community in India. This was not, however, the case with those
who drew their intellectual sustenance from Utilitarianism. For
those who thought like Mill, India provided no alternative to the
bewildering changes of industrializing Europe.
The insistence on Indian society being static eliminated the need
to look for points of change and, to that extent, for records which
may have registered this change. One of the functions of using the
past is to legitimize changes in the present. This becomes irrele vant
if there is no change and no record of change. From Mill’s pers-
pective, the idea of a lack of history and thereby the elimination
of a past lends support to the idea of despotic power. Any changes
implemented cannot then be accused of violating tradition, nor can
any appeal be made to thwart despotism in the name of the past.
For Mill, therefore, the legends which accrued in Hindu texts were
fantasies, and he was opposed to Jones’ view that historical events
could be gleaned from such legends.
u
Such theories were current in much European thought about India.
“Oriental Despotism” had its own history in Europe and had been
much debated in the eighteenth century, focusing on the question
of whether or not there was an absence of private property in land,
pertinent to the current European debate on how private property
impacted society.42 Tracing its roots to Aristotle and Greek views
on the Persian empire, it was revived in Europe after the Renais-
sance. During the Enlightenment debates, it came to the fore in a
controversy between Montesquieu and Voltaire. The former sup-
ported the idea that there could be no private property in a system
42 P. Anderson, Lineages of the Absolutist State, 462–549; D. Thorner, “Marx
on India and the Asiatic Mode of Production”, 33ff.; B. Hindess and P.Q. Hirst,
Pre-Capitalist Modes of Production; B. O’Leary, The Asiatic Mode of Production;
L. Krader, The Asiatic Mode of Production.
28 The Past Before Us
of Oriental Despotism: this was also the view of Adam Smith,
David Ricardo, and G.W.F. Hegel. But Voltaire and the Physio -
crats felt that the absence of private property in land in Asia was
not feasible.
As a theory of explanation, Oriental Despotism was useful to
the British administrator arguing for the termination of existing
systems and the introduction of new institutions. The change
would also allow the state to control the new system, a control to
which Asian societies would acquiesce because they had not
known better. These ideas filtered through to colonial administra-
tors trained in Haileybury College and Fort William. A parallel to
this was discovering and interpreting a history for the early Indian
past. That views of Indian society were not all entirely bleak is
suggested by the debate on the village community, where opinion
was divided as to whether the village communities were subordi-
nated to the despot or whether they were autarchic and constituted
a collection of republics. These views grew out of investigating the
revenue systems of pre-colonial India, a study which could have
deflected the investigation into more empirical avenues had there
not been the imprint of theories such as Oriental Despotism.
7. The German Romantic Movement and India
New theories of a different kind emerged from the European
excitement at discovering what many believed was the cradle of
world culture. This was in part fuelled by the thought that there
might be found an Oriental Renaissance in the texts of Asia,
propelling innovative knowledge similar to the earlier revival
of Classical European learning.43 Adding to this anticipation was
the slowly increasing study of comparative philology, which
underlined the closeness of some Oriental languages, Sanskrit in
particular, to classical European languages. Some among German
philosophers and linguists, such as F. Schlegel, constructed an an-
cient past for Indians as people enveloped in a childlike innocence
and purity. This involved studying the roots of ancient languages
such as Indo-Aryan and Dravidian. This then meant coping with
43 R. Schwab, La Renaissance Orientale.
Searching for Early Indian Historical Writing 29
a degree of competition and tension between those arguing for
the priority of each language.44 Indo-Aryan soon assumed greater
importance, initially due to the dominant status of the Vedas as
part of brahmanical learning and on account of it being a cognate
of Old Iranian and Greek.
The earlier emphasis on religion and mysticism being charac-
teristic of Indian culture, to the virtual exclusion of rational ways
of systematizing knowledge, was reinforced by some aspects of
German Romanticism. The discovery of India was as if Europe
had come upon a pristine civilization with which it had once, in
the distant past, had links. Such ideas tended to divide views on
India and even led to accusations of Indo-mania.45 Among those
joining issue was G.W.F. Hegel, who was especially critical of
the absence of individual freedom in Indian society. To this was
linked his insistence that India was a land without recorded his-
tory and given to fantasies about the past.46 Added to this was the
argument that in India caste, viewed as civil society, had over-
whelmed the state, and without a state there could be no history.
The debate continued in the writings of Friedrich Schelling and
Arthur Schopenhauer. But much of this remained in the form of
sporadic views. Systemizing these ideas into theories applicable
to Indian texts came from others.
A different analysis grew out of the interest of German writers
linked to Romanticism in literature. Sanskrit literature was said
to embody the oldest yet the most developed human language,
and so whether or not there were texts that were histories was of
little consequence. Literature in Sanskrit was said to articulate an
intense closeness between nature and culture, a subject of immense
interest to German Romanticism. Although Hegel was critical of
Indological studies, Johan Herder and August Wilhelm Schlegel
were deeply interested in these themes. Such views fed into what
was emerging in the latter part of the nineteenth century as a major
theory of the origins of language and culture, and it was inevitably
tied to how the beginnings of Indian history came to be viewed.
44 T. Trautmann, Aryans and British India.
45 W. Halbfass, India and Europe.
46 G.W.F. Hegel, Lectures on the Philosophy of History, 140–1, 162–4.
30 The Past Before Us
The most influential theory of origins in the interpretation
of early Indian history was the theory of an Aryan race. This
made an impact and became popular. It postulated an invasion of
northern India by a racial group identified as the Aryans, a people
who spoke an Indo­European language which was differentiated
from other Indo-European languages by being labelled “Indo-
Aryan”. The argument for the existence of an Aryan race drew
on comparative philology, the affinities between Indo­European
languages, and the mythology and social institutions of those who
spoke these languages.47 The idea of an Aryan invasion was based
on references in the Ṛgveda to hostilities against the dāsas, or those
already settled on the land, and where the victorious āryas were
the authors of the texts.48 (The Ṛgveda was viewed in the nine-
teenth century as the earliest historical record in India, a view
which has had to be radically altered by the uncovering of archaeo-
logical evidence, especially that of the Harappan cities.) The entirely
different Puranic version of historical beginnings was ignored on
the ground that these texts were of less importance and compiled
at a later date.
The upper castes, and particularly the brāhmaṇas, were seen as
lineal descendants of the Aryan race, while the lower castes and un-
touchables were regarded as the indigenous non-Aryans. Caste as
a social system was traced back to the notion of racial segregation
and differences of skin colour. References to ārya and dāsa varṇa,
where varṇa means colour largely as a classifier, were read liter-
ally as distinguishing fair-skinned āryas from dark-skinned dāsas,
with little concession to other possible readings. Caste as varṇa
came to be seen as a rigid system of social organization, essen -
tially unchanging since early times.
This theory has also to be seen against the wider application
of these ideas to European racial identities popularized through
the much-discussed writings of Comte de Gobineau and others.
The social origins of Europe were explained by identifying Aryan
and non-Aryan elements in which the former were, inevitably,
associated with the aristocracy.49 The white race was said to be
47 L. Poliokov, The Aryan Myth.
48 R. Thapar, The Aryan: Recasting Constructs.
49 J.A. Comte de Gobineau, Essai sur l’inégalite des races humaines, 1–4.
Searching for Early Indian Historical Writing 31
blessed with the two main elements of civilization, a religion and a
history.50 The scholarship of Orientalism was not immune to these
ideas, particularly in relation to German Romanticism, which had
turned its attention to the study of primitive origins and the purity
of peoples as embodied in myth, saga, and legend.51 There was
an insistence on the pristine purity of Sanskrit as an ur-language.
Those associated with the language—the Aryan Hindus—were
seen as the founders of civilization. The ideas of Gobineau were
propagated by Ernest Renan, also a friend of Max Müller.52 The
wish to classify humankind was reinforced by the intellectual as-
cendancy of the theories of Social Darwinism, which were applied
to societies and peoples in determining their status. References to
the āryas in the Ṛgveda seemed to fall propitiously into place in a
theory which counterposed Aryans with non-Aryans.
The initial identification of language with race was rapidly ac-
cepted; few paused to make a demarcation. Although later it was
cautioned against even by scholars such as Max Müller, both he
and others tended to use the terms interchangeably. By the end
of the nineteenth century it was generally assumed that the early
history of India was to be viewed as the spread of the Aryan race
over the subcontinent, with the Aryan-derived languages being
used to gauge this expansion. History therefore lay in starting with
the foundations of Aryan culture in the Vedic texts, and its devel-
opment and establishment in northern India, and later elsewhere.
This explanation of origins presupposed that Vedic Brahmanism
was to be equated with Aryan culture, and since Vedic Brahman-
ism showed little concern for history, there was in the civilization
a general absence of a sense of history.
Furthermore, the notion of an invasion by “the Aryans”—their
conquest of northern India and the attribution of having brought
civilization to India—came to be seen as an earlier parallel to
Bri tish conquest and imperialism in the present.53 Everything
seem ed to fall neatly into place: that the history of a language
is distinct, and that linguistic changes in themselves provide
50 L. Poliokov, The Aryan Myth, 214ff.
51 W. Halbfass, India and Europe, 69ff.
52 E. Renan, “L’avenir de la Science”, 728ff.
53 E. Leach, “Aryan Invasions over Four Millennia”.
32 The Past Before Us
historical evidence, was not investigated. Doubts about the Aryan
race as applied to India arose both from new evidence, particularly
from archaeology and linguistics, as well as altered perspectives
on the history and cultures of this period.
There is much in this theory open to question. “Aryan” is a label
used for a language, whereas race has a biological origin. The
two cannot be confused. The notion of rigorous racial segregation
defined by language is untenable. People of varying ethnic origins
can use the same language; or, alternatively, people of the same
ethnic origin can use different languages. Where those settled in
the same area use different languages and yet intermingle, there
the cultural and ideological idioms are bound to overlap. The texts
from such cultures do not represent a single cultural articulation
but evolve out of the relations between multiple cultural groups,
with some limited continuities from earlier times.54
8. Attempts to Explain Indian Society:
Marx, Weber, and Others
The debate on the nature of Indian society and history was in
many ways an exercise in theory, drawing upon existing European
controversies. In this debate the Oriental culture being examined
seems largely to have become an arena for trying out the valid-
ity of these ideas. The diversity in ways of perceiving the Indian
past can be seen in the theories. Even in the rubric of Oriental -
ism, variations can be recognized.55 The premises of these theories
also yielded a hierarchy in which to position texts. The Vedas,
Purāṇas, and Dharmaśāstras were given precedence over caritas
and other literature, whereas any genuine search for a historical
tradition would have given priority to these other texts. If current
European theory privileged the validity of European historical
writing, the application of this notion to a society which suppos-
edly had none became an exercise in testing that theory. Arriving
at this conclusion was distinct from its practical advantage: such a
54 D.D. Kosambi, An Introduction to the Study of Indian History, 93–101;
R. Thapar, The Aryan: Recasting Constructs, 53ff.
55 P. Heehs, “Shades of Orientalism: Paradoxes and Problems in Indian
Historiography”, 169–95.
Searching for Early Indian Historical Writing 33
reading provided the opportunity for formulating a history for the
colony that would underpin colonial policy. The present of India
was thus viewed as the past of Europe within the general format
of social evolutionism.56
These theorists were not much concerned with the empirical
details of the society being studied. For some of these scholars,
Asian societies provided a form of exotica and permitted a play
of fantasy. There were curious anomalies in these attitudes. There
was, for instance, little attempt, on the part of those learning from
their informants, to use the information for a discourse on the
wider context of the texts and the worldview of their authors.
Although the Asiatic Society was founded in 1784 as a forum for
Indological research, it remained closed to Indian participation
until 1829, almost half a century later. Then, too, the Society’s in-
terest seems to have lain largely in encouraging wealthy Indians to
provide donations, which the latter gladly did, seeing it as a means
of acquiring status.57
Colonial attitudes to knowledge pertaining to their colonies as-
sumed that such knowledge was a form of control.58 Thus, William
Jones wrote of the itihāsas and Purāṇas being “in our power”, and
a century or so later Lord Curzon saw the intellectual discovery
of the Orient as the necessary furniture of empire. History was the
portal to knowledge about the colony and every aspect of colonial
activity was formulated as a history of knowledge-gathering.
This control would be enhanced if it could be maintained that
the colonial society had no awareness of its past, and, even such
awareness as it had, had been procured by the colonial power.
Thus, if Indian civilization could be shown to be a-historical, the
European discovery of Indian history would constitute an addi-
tional aspect of power articulated as knowledge, and become an
aspect of domination.
Assisting this process was the almost obsessive concern with
seeing the Orient necessarily as “the Other” of western Europe.
56 B. Cohn, An Anthropologist among the Historians and Other Essays,
50ff.
57 O.P. Kejariwal, The Asiatic Society of Bengal, 153.
58 E. Said, Orientalism.
34 The Past Before Us
The two most influential statements on “Otherness” are to be
found in Karl Marx and Max Weber. The starting point was the
question why Asian societies did not develop capitalism and were
therefore a contrast to Europe. This exploration was conditioned
by the rather fragmentary historical knowledge gathered up to that
point, and by the centrality given to theories about Asian societies
even when these conflicted with empirical data (a predilection
which has not been altogether discarded even now).
The construction of “the Other” was derived not from trying
to understand a different world’s perception of itself but from the
absence of European characteristics. Marx emphasized the lack
of change in India, and therefore of dialectics and history.59 He
says: “India then could not escape the fate of being conquered
and the whole of her past history if it be anything is the history
of successive conquests she has undergone. Indian society has no
history at all, at least no known history. What we call its history
is but the history of the successive intruders who founded their
empires on the passive basis of that unresisting and unchanging
society.”60 His historical treatment of Asian societies in his Asiatic
Mode of Production again emphasized the static nature of such
societies, and the inevitability therefore of their not having either
a history or historical writing.
Weber’s emphasis on what has been called the “karma theo-
dicy”—the tying in of one’s actions with birth into a specific
caste—precludes the possibility of both innovations and the defi-
ance of caste rules.61 Added to this was his view, now regarded
as controversial, that caste was a significant factor in the failure
of economic rationalism.62 India, according to him, registered an
59 B. Hindess and P.Q. Hirst, Pre-capitalist Modes of Production; B. O’Leary,
The Asiatic Mode of Production; L. Krader, The Asiatic Mode of Production;
R.A.L.H. Gunawardana, “The Analysis of Pre-colonial Social Formations in
Asia in the Writings of Karl Marx”, 365–88.
60 S. Avineri (ed.), Karl Marx on Colonialism and Modernisation, 132–3;
Karl Marx, “The Future Results of British Rule in India”, 217–22.
61 J. Heesterman, “Caste and Karma”, in idem, The Inner Conflict of Tradi-
tion, 194ff.
62 D. Kantowsky, “Max Weber on India and Indian Interpretations of Weber”,
141–74; idem, “Max Weber’s Contributions to Indian Sociology”, 307–17; idem
(ed.), Recent Research on Max Weber’s Studies on Hinduism; S. Munshi, “Max
Searching for Early Indian Historical Writing 35
absence of the economic rationalism necessary to capitalism, as
also the rational ethic of ascetic Puritanism. This would doubtless
also support the notion of an absence of the articulation of his-
tory as a rational narrative. In a larger sense, how the Other was
constructed is a question that came to be asked only relatively
recently, pioneered by Edward Said’s Orientalism.
Interest in caste had by now come to take a central position
in the definition of the Other, as well as in trying to understand
Indian society. Whereas in the eighteenth century relatively little
was written on caste, by the end of the nineteenth century it had
become the focus of explaining social functioning.63 Given the
premise in much of Indological studies that the individual was
not a fundamental entity in Indian society, caste in a sense stood
in for the functions normally associated with individual interests.
Hegel had also argued that caste appropriated the state, thereby
negating a fundamental characteristic of a civilization, namely
the balance between state and society.64 There was now a seem-
ing replacement of the textual base of Orientalist scholarship by
an empirical examination of the functioning of caste. Yet, within
the explanations offered, earlier theories conditioned many of the
views on caste. Thus, Herbert Risley accepted racial segregation
as the basis of caste.65 Although others rejected this in favour of
occupation or kinship relations or ritual status, the combination
of the theory of an Aryan race and the nineteenth-century reading
of caste came to stay. Into this there entered the priority given to
the Dharmaśāstra texts as guides to caste functioning.
Weber’s views on caste reflect the theories then current in addi-
tion to his own reading of the texts.66 Weber saw caste as a status
group with rigid rules of marriage and with pollution acting as
Weber on India: An Introductory Critique”, 1–30; R. Thapar, “Durkheim and
Weber on Theories of Society and Race Relations Relating to Pre-colonial India”,
in idem, Cultural Pasts, 21–51.
63 N.B. Dirks, Castes of Mind: Colonialism and the Making of Modern
India.
64 G.W.F. Hegel, Lectures on the Philosophy of History, 160ff.
65 H. Risley, The People of India.
66 M. Weber, The Religion of India: The Sociology of Hinduism and Bud-
dhism.
36 The Past Before Us
a discriminating factor in social relations. The spread of caste
society was brought about by three agencies: conquest, the con-
version of tribes (clans) into castes, and the subdivision of castes.
The juxtaposition of racial differences was significant, but he did
not see race as the basis of caste. Conquerors claimed rights in
land, and the conquered became subservient and lost their rights.
The levels at which tribes were converted to castes varied. Ruling
families were often given kṣatriya status, and an entire tribe could
be converted to a single caste. The subdivision of castes meant that
a new caste could branch off from an existing one by migration, a
change in ritual duties, entry into a new religious sect, a change of
occupation, and differences in the inheritance of property where
the better­off would imitate high­caste behaviour. A new caste
was established when there was a denial of connubial rights and
commensality from the existing caste, and the adoption of new
rituals by the new caste. The formation of castes was fundamental
to the Indian social order.
Yet the possibilities of castes maintaining their own histories,
although known to exist, received little attention as a variation on
potential historical records. Such views, coming out of European
sociological interests and empirical ethnographic data, did lead to
Indian historians and sociologists giving more attention to the evi-
dence on society in the past; but the questioning of the stereotypes
inherited from the nineteenth century was yet to come. What was
missed out was the fact that changing the status of a caste, such as
that of the scribes, was an aspect of social change. The establishing
of social change requires records of previous and current statuses,
and these are an aspect of historical traditions.
9. The Imperial View and Nationalist Reactions
Meanwhile, throughout the nineteenth century, the discovery of
data for the reconstruction of Indian history had continued apace,
with the early attempts of the Asiatic Society being pursued by
officers involved in the administration of India. The Asiatic Soci­
ety was the base both for explorers and surveyors such as James
Rennell, Francis Buchanan, and Colin Mackenzie, as well as for
scholars who, subsequent to William Jones, were intent on linking
Searching for Early Indian Historical Writing 37
the history of India to other centres of civilization, more so those as-
sociated with the Biblical theory of creation or with Greco-Roman
parallels.67 Colin Mackenzie collected a vast number of manus-
cripts relating to local history of various kinds.68 The collection
had been made primarily by brāhmaṇas, and thus the choice was
selective; and, naturally, a brāhmaṇa discourse mediated between
the text and its reading. Mackenzie’s interest was in data relating to
the history of places. Interest in the history of peoples and castes
was to develop later. The Asiatic Society did not permit Macken-
zie’s Indian assistants to work on his archive, and so once again the
social context of knowledge was separated from the information
gathered.69
Gradually, however, the main concern shifted to obtaining hard
evidence on the Indian past, even if mostly in relation to other civil-
izations. This was done through work in epigraphy, archaeology,
and numismatics. Painstaking scholarship yielded rich results.
James Prinsep deciphered inscriptions in the brāhmī script, the
major breakthrough being what were later identified as those of the
Mauryan king Aśoka. Alexander Cunningham followed the itiner-
ary of the seventh-century Chinese Buddhist pilgrim Xuanzang and
located a number of Buddhist sites mentioned in his text.70 Budd-
hist monuments made it incumbent to study Buddhist texts, and
a new area of interest emerged with these studies, although these
texts were never at that time given the centrality associated with
brahmanical literature. Numismatics helped in deciphering scripts
where the coins were bilingual—such as those of the Indo-Bactrian
Greeks with names in Greek and brāhmī—thus also linking Indian
and Hellenistic history. Temple architecture and Hindu icons at-
tracted attention, though even in the study of these the familiarity
of the Greek aesthetic was sought and the imprint of “the Greek
miracle” could never quite be sloughed off.
This was largely a continuation of Orientalist scholarship. At
67 See also O.P. Kejariwal, The Asiatic Society of Bengal and the Discovery
of India’s Past.
68 H.H. Wilson, MacKenzie Collection: A Descriptive Catalogue, 2 vols.
69 N.B. Dirks, The Hollow Crown.
70 Abu Imam, Alexander Cunningham and the Beginnings of Indian Archaeo-
logy.
38 The Past Before Us
the level of the technique of discovery, it remains impressive. But
over its reconstruction and interpretation of the larger flow of
history European models hovered, and comparisons with Europe
loomed large. The knowledge that surfaced came from elite and
upper­caste sources and informants who had configured a specific
reconstruction of the past in ways conducive to their self-interest.
This “subject positioning” was not taken into account. Admit-
tedly, data for lower social groups were not so forthcoming; nor,
however, were they sought. Underlying all this activity was the
conviction that the Indian past had to be wholly reconstructed
through contemporary scholarship, and that this scholarship had
to do with testing textual data for authenticity determined by
current concepts.
An adjunct to this scholarship was the interest in the largely
oral compositions of the bards (although some by now had been
recorded as texts). James Tod had a romantic vision of Rajput
clans and argued that his sources, collected from bards and Jaina
monks, constituted historical records.71 He also attempted to link
the European to the Indian past and suggested that the Rajputs
were of Scythian or even Scandinavian origin. In the early twen-
tieth century L.P. Tessitori made a systematic attempt to collect
bardic material in the form of prose chronicles, poems, and gene-
alogies from Rajasthan and Central India, and tried to correlate
them with inscriptions.72 But there was little dialogue between
those who were interested in such documents on the one hand, and
those who on the other were reconstructing what they perceived as
an impersonal narrative of the early history of India, using what
they regarded as the more reliable brahmanical textual sources.
Whereas material from bards and similar sources was allowed
within limits as data for local history, it was largely ignored when
discussing the wider concerns of history.
By and large, the bardic data was treated essentially as folk lit-
erature, more the art of the storyteller than even of the chronicler.
71 J. Tod, Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan.
72 L.P. Tessitori, “A Scheme for the Bardic and Historical Survey of Rajpu-
tana”, vol. 10, 373–86; idem, vol. 15, 5–79; idem, vol. 16, 251–79; idem, “Bardic
and Historical Survey of Rajputana: A Descriptive Catalogue of Bardic and
Historical Manuscripts”.
Searching for Early Indian Historical Writing 39
With linear chronology and politics in an elementary sense seen
as the ingredients of history, the bardic records, dependent on a
long oral tradition, were often set aside as unreliable. There was
not as yet a sufficient understanding of the status of the bard in
Indian society, a status that was special yet separate—even as the
brāhmaṇa took over the compositions of the bard. The records
with which the latter had been associated, the account of a fam-
ily, a clan, or a caste—forms of which continue to this day in the
hands of both bards and of some categories of brāhmaṇas,73 were
considered low in the hierarchy of historical sources. That the
recording of the past could be a separate occupational function
within the parameters of a caste society was not fully recognized.
Even now, recognition of the bardic tradition, both oral and liter-
ate, is different from the textual records. The oral tradition is met
with in Central India, among many clans and tribes, such as the
Pradhans, and at places of pilgrimage.74 Written texts are more
extensive in some areas, and these correlate information on what
was regarded as central to society, namely, consanguinity, marriage
alliances, and property.75 This tradition is still in practice since
genealogies of high-status families continue to be maintained at
centres of pilgrimage.
There was a gulf between these keepers of a historical tradi-
tion and historians, perhaps best demonstrated in the rather literal
fashion in which genealogical data was used by some historians.
Genealogical lists from the epics and Purāṇas were taken as fac-
tual records and attempts were made to identify them with various
racial groups;76 or else attempts were made to use genealogies for
the reconstruction of the chronology of earliest Indian history.77
73 S. Havale, The Pradhans of the Upper Narbada Valley; N. Zeigler, “Mewari
Historical Chronicles”, 219ff.
74 The category of brāhmaṇas known as the pāṇḍās maintain the genealogies
of dominant castes. They are located in centres of pilgrimage where their status
is lower than that of the brāhmaṇas who are ritual specialists.
75 C. von Fürer-Haimendorf, “The Historical Value of Indian Bardic Lit-
erature”, 87–93.
76 F.E. Pargiter, “Earliest Indian Traditional History”, 265–95 and 741–5;
idem, Ancient Indian Historical Tradition.
77 S.N. Pradhan, Chronology of Ancient India; A.D. Pusalker, Studies in the
Epics and Purāṇas; R. Morton-Smith, Dates and Dynasties in Earliest India.
40 The Past Before Us
Much effort has gone into trying to unravel the genealogical lists
and arrange them in some chronological order which might be
backed by other historical evidence, but so far the earlier sections
of such lists have defied such order.
Oral traditions have now been examined as sources of history,
particularly as in some societies the oral tradition can be the sole
source of any sort of record of the past. There is an interest in the
oral traditions of societies without literacy, societies which by the
earlier definition were said to be without history.78 Oral traditions
claim to draw from memory. The contention between history and
memory is not recent. It has existed in records; these often contest
what is claimed to have happened on the one hand, and on the
other the perceptions of those happenings among various people.
The two have been in dialogue, but to go back to the texts and try
to unravel the dialogue is difficult. Pierre Nora suggests a differ-
ence: that history in our times is intellectual and secular, calling
for analysis and criticism; and memory can install remembrance
in what is sacred. The latter presumably cannot be analysed in the
same way and has to be drawn out by history.
The demarcation between history and the bardic tradition was
such that even the earlier Indian historians did not feel the need
to speak to bards about their records. Historians working on
pre-Islamic India initially subscribed to the colonial view on the
question of a historical tradition, with most accepting the view
that Indian society was a-historical. Their interest was largely anti -
quarian and focused on collecting data. These historians were
more often themselves from the upper castes—brāhmaṇa and
kāyastha or its equivalent. Interestingly, they were the castes that
kept the records in the past, more particularly official records, and
so were naturally not given to questioning the premises of the
colonial interpretations, at least not until the impact of a national-
ist ideology began to become effective from the early twentieth
78 J. Vansina, The Oral Tradition; idem, Oral Tradition as History; D.P.
Henige, The Chronology of Oral Tradition; idem, Oral Historiography; A.M.
Shah and R.G. Shroff, “The Vahivanca Barots of Gujarat: A Caste of Gene-
alogists and Mythographers”, 40–70; N.P. Ziegler, “The Seventeenth Century
Chronicles of Marvara: A Study in the Evolution and Use of Oral Tradition in
Western India”, 127–53.
Searching for Early Indian Historical Writing 41
century. A possible Aryan race, for example, was a notion attract-
ive to such Indian historians because, among other things, it linked
early India with the roots of European culture and endorsed the
special status of the upper castes claiming Aryan descent. Com-
mon roots were postulated when Max Müller, speaking to British
probationers of the Indian Civil Service in 1882, told them that
in going out to India they were going to their original home, a
place full of memories which only scholars like him could read.
Complementing this, Keshab Chandra Sen spoke of the coming of
the British to India as the meeting of parted cousins.79 Nationalist
historiography also incorporated the views of those such as B.G.
Tilak who fully supported the Aryan theory, ignoring the views of
Jyotiba Phule, for example, who turned the theory on its head, as it
were, by arguing that the Aryans and therefore their descendants
were foreign to India.80
Although the concept of Oriental Despotism was rejected, Mill’s
periodization of Indian history was not questioned. A century later
the nomenclature was changed from Hindu, Muslim, and British
to Ancient, Medieval, and Modern, in an attempt to secularize it
and make it happily coincide with the periodization of European
history. In late imperial and early nationalist histories, the Hindu/
Ancient period was projected as one of sustained prosperity, an
argument which subconsciously conceded the early argument
for the absence of major historical change in that period. Cur -
rent reconstructions became so much a part of the definition of
history that Indian historians, at this point in time, tended to re-
gard as peripheral the views of the past that were given in early
sources. There was little attempt to analyse these sources, in terms
either of what they were propagating or the nature of their biases.
The colonial construction of the past, followed by nationalist
79 M. Müller, India: What Can it Teach Us?, 20; K.C. Sen, Keshab Chandra
Sen’s Lectures in India, 323.
80 The theory of an Aryan invasion is axiomatic to those who claim to be the
first inhabitants of India—and thus the inheritors of the land—and is therefore
popular among some Dalits. The Hindutva view, which claims India as the
cradle of the Aryans, is equally opposed to the notions of both invasion and the
migration of the Indo-Aryan language from West Asia: R. Thapar, The Aryan:
Recasting Constructs, 65–88.
42 The Past Before Us
historians, was methodologically therefore a departure from the
early Indian tradition.
Indian historians writing in the early twentieth century ques-
tioned some of the generalizations generated by colonial interpre-
tations of early Indian history. But on the question of historical
writing in ancient Indian there was ambivalence, the prevalent
view being summed by in the statement of R.C. Majumdar: “It is a
well-known fact that with the single exception of the Rājataraṅgiṇī
(History of Kashmir) there is no historical text in Sanskrit dealing
with the whole or even parts of India. But ideas of history and
historical literature were not altogether lacking.”81 To assume that
there could have been a history of India as a single entity is to
assume the impossible for those times. Majumdar mentions vari-
ous categories of data that could be associated with the writing of
history, but none of which constituted historical writing. He does
however dismiss the popular argument that there was historical
writing in the past, the texts having since been lost.
10. Shifting the Paradigm: Recent Views
The 1960s saw a turning point in the idea that it might be feasible
to search for history in the early period. Even though a historical
tradition seemed debatable, there was the possibility of looking
afresh at the subject. The recognition that Indian society was not
static and did undergo change, and that the nature of such change
was not uniform in time and space, constituted a radically different
view of the Indian past from the one held earlier. The so-called
Hindu period, stretching from the Harappan civilization in the
third millennium bc to the establishment of the Delhi Sultanate in
the thirteenth century ad, is now seen not as an unbroken continu-
ity but as registering periods of major change within this timespan.
Recognition of change is always a nodal point in history, enabling
the emergence of new identities as well as reformulations of the
past for the purposes of the present.
Alternative theories of explanation pointing to varieties of
historical change came with a later generation of scholars, using
81 R.C. Majumdar, “Ideas of History in Sanskrit Literature”, 13–28.
Searching for Early Indian Historical Writing 43
both data and methods drawing on a number of disciplines and
new theories of analyses, some initially drawn from Marxism.
The work of D.D. Kosambi attempted a creative use of Marxist
methodology even while distancing itself from many of Marx’s
specific views on Asian society.82 This was a paradigm shift. In the
last few decades it has acted as a point of departure for a number of
analyses of Indian social reality, some of which have drawn more
widely from theories of social change as well as theories from
related disciplines. These have resulted in a considerable interest
in economic history, and the degree to which economic change
affected a broader historical change or was part of such a change;
and in social history, towards understanding social hierarchies
and caste historically; and in the links between social forms and
ideological expressions, including changes in religion.
Kosambi argued that history was not the recital of kings in
chronological order—which was a weakness in the early writing
of Indian history—but rather of the events and organization of a
society on which information was forthcoming. Although Kosambi
did not argue directly for the existence of historical traditions,
his analysis of early Indian society made the recognition of such
traditions a probability. Such analyses also have a bearing on the
question of how a society views its own past. Early records of
such views may not conform to modern definitions of historical
writing, but their perspective on the past nevertheless remains a
matter for study.
Historical change was also central to the research of R.S. Sharma,
whose work, primarily on social and economic history, came to
focus on the mutation to feudalism in post-Gupta India.83 Sharma
argued for feudal society marking a crucial difference from earlier
times. The debate that ensued on whether or not there was feudal-
ism was extensive and vigorous, and triggered many perceptive
discussions on the various societies of the subcontinent in that
82 See, in particular, D.D. Kosambi, An Introduction to the Study of Indian
History; idem, Myth and Reality; idem, The Culture and Civilisation of Ancient
India in Historical Outline; and Kosambi’s papers from various journals, col-
lected and republished in B.D. Chattopadhyaya (ed.), D.D. Kosambi: Combined
Methods in Indology and Other Writings.
83 R.S. Sharma, Indian Feudalism; idem, Early Medieval Indian Society.
44 The Past Before Us
period. These in turn have encouraged investigation into regional
history. The recognition of these historical processes by various
historians, whilst not directly concerned with historiography, has
neverthless made the exploration of historical ideas more feasible.
When historical change was conceded, there was a searching yet
again for historical traditions. However, the initial foray tended to
endorse the notion of the a-historicity of Indian civilization. Some
studies of this theme have been made, but they remain sporadic.
These include a collection of essays in which a few fresh ideas were
thrown up, though by and large the older thesis of an absence of
historical writing tended to be repeated.84 Nevertheless, that his-
toriographical possibilities for pre-Islamic India were considered
was in itself a major departure. An attempt was made later to in-
troduce a category of texts as distinctively historical, though yet
again without much discussion to support this claim and with only
a brief résumé of some of these texts.85 A more detailed explora-
tion of the texts which claim to incorporate historical perspectives
is necessary before they can be described as histories.
There has been some limited discussion since then on the early
Indian historical tradition. Historians have argued that a historical
tradition in early India did exist, but that it was a weak tradition
and much of the discussion therefore focuses on why, given the
intellection evident within sections of early Indian society, it never
developed into a major tradition. This has been in part attribut-
ed to the decentralized nature of political institutions, whereas
by contrast a centralized state asserts its legitimacy with greater
emphasis. However, even in a condition of political decentraliza-
tion, competition for power among a range of contenders, each
drawing on the past, can equally encourage strong claims. The
absence has also been attributed to the role of the priestly elite in
fabricating genealogies for rulers of low caste whose status could
not be openly disclosed, and to the exclusive control of brāhmaṇas
over the transmission of the tradition.86
84 C.H. Philips (ed.), Historians of India, Pakistan and Ceylon.
85 A.K. Warder, An Introduction to Indian Historiography.
86 B. Stein, “Early Indian Historiography: A Conspiracy Hypothesis”,
41–60.
Searching for Early Indian Historical Writing 45
Another explanation points to the bifurcation between the keep-
ers of state records, largely the scribal castes, and the brāhmaṇas
from whom a critical intellectual assessment might have been
expected.87 But the records of these two castes have not been
collected and analysed for historical ideas. Where there are state
records, there would not be too much difference between them
since both emanated from administrators. It is not that either cat-
egory was incapable of intellectual assessments, but the fact that
the emergence of historical traditions requires more than just the
keepers of traditions.
A further explanation argues that Mīmāṃsā philosophy un-
derplayed the centrality of history, especially in relation to the
Vedas.88 The point, however, is that the Vedic corpus was the least
important as historical writing, as indeed there were other ways
of thinking, such as the Buddhist and the Jaina, as also their par-
ticipation in debates with Nyāya philosophers, which were more
attuned to historical perspectives.
A more defensive view takes the position that history is a
Western invention and that Indian society’s record of itself was
differently done. Since historical writing of the Western variety
(which ever that might be) was not important, there were no
histories.89 Along similar lines it is said that historiography was
replaced by a wilful amnesia that allowed Indians to forget their
subjection to foreign rulers.90 There is here a failure to recognize
that much of Indian history was not centrally involved with foreign
rule, nor was what we today may call foreign rule necessarily seen
as such. Such views have encouraged the generalization about the
absence of history in India even among historians not working
on Indian data.91
It has also been argued that in fact there was a historical
87 H. Kulke, “Geschichteschreibung und Geschichtesbild in Hinduistechen
Mittelalter”, 100–13; idem, “Historiography in Early Medieval India”, 71–83.
88 S. Pollock, “Mīmāṃsā and the Problem of History in Traditional India”,
603–10.
89 A. Nandy, “History’s Forgotten Doubles”, 44–66.
90 V. Lal, The History of History: Politics and Scholarship in Modern India,
14–16, 58–60.
91 P. Veyne, Writing History, 80ff.; M. de Certeau, The Writing of History.
46 The Past Before Us
tradition—although it is not described as such—but that, despite
its existence the colonial power insisted that the colonized had
refused to reveal their past. It was also an attempt to cut off the
newly educated from their traditional past, which was “the generic
discourse by which our culture had constructed and cyclically re-
produced the past in sacred and ancestral time.”92 Statements such
as this are rather confusing. Are we to understand that the cyclic
reproduction of the past in sacred and ancestral time (possibly the
reference here is to the Purāṇas) represents history as we know
it now, or that it is opposed to present-day history and therefore
has a validity of its own as history. If it is the latter, then this has
to be explained with reference to pre-colonial texts incorporating
historical traditions, else such statements read merely like celebra-
tions of altruistic “native” traditions.
It has been stated more than once that the specific ways of
ordering the past differ from culture to culture. Such an ordering
or historiography would not be obvious from the Indian tradition
to those familiar largely with the European. This, having been
problematic to the colonial perspective on Indian historiography,
continued as a given into later times.
Historical writing in the Indian regional languages from the
mid-second millennium ad could seem familiar, up to a point, to
a history emphasizing chronology and sequential narrative. But
this may well have had elements of a continuity from earlier times
and been influenced by the chronicles maintained at the courts
of the Sultans. Court languages have always had a dialogue with
regional languages and with their traditions, and even more so
in the records of the second millennium ad, prior to the colonial
period.
An exception to the above views was an important discussion
of one specific genre, which was a study of substance relating to
a particular category of early Indian historical traditions—carita
(biographical) literature.93 An attempt was made to draw from
them current views about the past. Equally significant is the
92 R. Guha, History at the Limit of World History; idem, An Indian Histori-
ography of India, 33.
93 V.S. Pathak, Ancient Historians of India.
Searching for Early Indian Historical Writing 47
statement that not enough attention has been given to texts that
support the existence of a historical tradition, even, for example,
the vaṃśāvalīs (chronicles).94 More recently, attention has turned
to texts from medieval times in regional languages, as in Telugu,
Marathi, and Tamil, which have been discussed as constituting
a historical tradition even if not premised on modern historical
thinking.95 Such writings are linked to earlier forms.
Textures of Time has been widely discussed. The texts analy-
sed are in part similar to some that I shall refer to, but there is a
considerable difference in historical background since they are
later than the ones I have chosen, and their location is in pen-
insular India. The expectation of history is somewhat different.
The book raises the important question of how societies of those
times defined history. Even where a text is described as kāvya
(literary composition), a distinction has to be made between texts
intended as history and those with a broader literary interest. This
distinction is important to ascertaining what constitutes a historical
tradition. It would not be valid to deny the distinction and treat all
texts relating to the past as history, and of equal value. As stated
by the authors, the genres recording history are not identical with
those of the Western tradition and there is no single genre of his-
tory carrying a specific name. Since history is culturally formed,
much depends on the purpose of the record and the interaction
of the author with the audience. In the absence of a single term
for the genre, the categorization of texts would indicate intention.
This study also shows a degree of continuity in historical forms
and perspectives, not unconnected to questions about the nature
and function of history.
A close knowledge of pre-Islamic historiography throws light
on how the past was continually reformulated even before hist ory-
writing came to be practised at the Sultanate and Mughal courts.
94 M. Witzel, “On Indian Historical Writing”, 1–57.
95 D. Ali, “Royal Eulogy as World History”; S. Guha, “Speaking Historically:
The Changing Voices of Historical Narratives in Western India 1400–1900”,
1084–1103; V. Narayana Rao, et al., Textures of Time: Writing History in South
India 1600–1800; P. Deshpande, Creative Pasts; R. Aquil and P. Chatterjee (eds),
History in the Vernacular. See also the debate on Textures of Time in History
and Theory, 2007, 46, 364–426.
48 The Past Before Us
It seems evident that the past was not treated as an undifferenti-
ated past, for several forms of earlier writing show awareness of
historical change. What we call historical traditions were evolved
forms sieved through many of these points of change where, at
each new point, the past was reformulated from the repertoire of
earlier texts and from current concerns.
2
Towards Historical Traditions
1. Early Historiographies
Colonial constructions of the early history of India are differ-
ent from those of more recent times. This is in part because
of the additional evidence that we now have, but more
because of new ways of interpreting the evidence. These new
inter pretive methods make it possible to illumine the reading of
historical views of earlier periods. When trying to arrive at an
understanding of the idea of history in an earlier period, a distinc-
tion has to be maintained between how the past is understood and
represented, and a perception of the past as specifically historical.
These are interconnected and involve questions of historiographi-
cal frameworks.
Societies represent their past in various ways. A distinction may
be made between on the one hand “the past”—the reality of which
can only be known in an abstract sense but can be understood;
and on the other the nature of its representation, which is in part
what is intended by the writing of history. In early periods, this
representation took the form of a narrative that related what was
believed to have happened in periods prior to the present. This
could involve some attempts to explain the events of the past,
and in turn required establishing a causal connection between
the events and whatever was viewed as the agency determining
their form. Historicity comes to the fore when the past is used
more purposefully—to legitimize the present—and when causa-
tion becomes an important aspect of the philosophy underlying
50 The Past Before Us
that history. Historical traditions in turn create a historiographical
context that includes changing ideologies. Societies, in giving a
structure to their past through the process of writing history, draw
on this context or framework.
The Indian historical tradition has two distinct historiographies.
One emerges from what might be called a Puranic framework,
and the other from that of the Sramanic ideologies, particularly
the Buddhist and Jaina. These two forms give divergent interpre-
tations, highlighting or suppressing events and persons from the
past. They are evidently aware of the alternative position, although
this is not always stated, being reflected in mutual borrowings or
exclusion. In both, the creation of an identity for the Self involves
measuring oneself against the identity of the Other.
There is a third tradition, less clearly differentiated from the
other two. This tradition, maintained by bards, goes back to the
early epic compositions where, in whatever manner the subsequent
authors (who contributed later additions to the epics) happen to
be projected, the earlier association with bards cannot be erased.
The bardic tradition continues as a substratum into later times as
well, even when historical writing was the preserve of scribes
and brāhmaṇas. The bards claimed that they were maintaining
the genealogies of families that were of high status and had the
authority that could mutate into dynasties. In the second millen-
nium ad these compositions acquired importance as historical
sources. It remains for them to be analysed as essentially oral
traditions, and to be put through the investigations that are being
made of oral traditions as forms of history.
Both Puranic and Sramanic historiographies contain narra-
tives relating the past. The way the narrative is formulated has to
do with the historiography that it represents. The ideologies that
influence the historiography draw from both existing political
economies and religious concerns, and the historiography changes
when these change. Therefore, more than one genre is deployed
in generating texts. An essential interest running through them
all is, of course, a curiosity about the past and its function in the
present.
Where history is tied to the aspirations of a particular commu-
nity, it takes the form of a single narrative which seeks to make
Towards Historical Traditions 51
acceptable a particular view of the past. But historical changes
led to other alternative narratives of the same past. This then in-
troduced the notion of explaining why some narratives were more
accurate than others, although the definition of accuracy could be
subordinated to the prejudices of ideology. This reminds us that
the reconstruction of the past as history is always a representation
and cannot be the “complete truth”. The past cannot be resurrected,
it can only be comprehended and explained. An awareness of
the reasons for accepting particular claims to knowledge, and an
insistence on evidence, help to separate fact from fiction. In the
words of Jan Huizinga, “History is the intellectual form in which
a civilization renders account to itself of its past.”1 History as
the narrative of a single voice also became problematic because
each such text is also an articulation of its context: the historian
has to be aware of both, and this was seldom recognized in pre-
modern times.
The context is what allows us today to observe the complexities
of the past looking at its own earlier past. We need to be aware
of what is selected and what is left out; of the audience directly
addressed and the audience presumed; of the awareness within
the narrative of political organization and its possible collabora-
tion with the author; and, finally, we must know whose culture is
being discussed.2
Narratives about the past go into the making of historical con-
sciousness and become the basis for collective identity. Social
memory is said to be reclaimed by what remains of the past,
whether in texts or artefacts. A claim is then made for the existence
of collective memory. But does such a social memory exist, or
does it have to be created? Memory is individual; therefore, what
is the process by which it is made “social”? Historical conscious-
ness is rooted in what is believed to be historical memory. This
is the turning point to past experience.3 But historical memory
is in itself a creation of the interplay of the past with the present.
1 J. Huizinga, “A Definition of the Concept of History”, 8–9.
2 A. Momigliano, “Polybius and Posidonius”, in idem, Alien Wisdom: The
Limits of Hellenisation; idem, Historicism Revisited, 63–70.
3 J. Ruesen, Western Historical Thinking.
52 The Past Before Us
The past can be recast so as to be used as a source of authority
and legitimacy in the present. Memories change because aspects
of the past can be refitted to the present, which involves some
highlighting and some suppression. But this construction, a hybrid
made out of the interplay of past and present, cannot be ignored
and can even achieve the status of historical tradition.
Essential to history is the shape and accounting of time. A dis-
tinction can be made between the past and the present, which
is initially often made through symbols, but gradually comes to
incorporate measurements of time. Much has been made of the
lack of history in India being tied to a cyclic concept of time, an
insistence which continues despite research to the contrary.4 This
is contrasted with the linear time of the Judeo-Christian tradi-
tion, which is said to provide a necessary factor for historical
thinking.
A sharp dichotomy between linear and cyclic time is not fea-
sible since elements of each overlap. The Greeks observed some
categories of time in cycles, as did the Indians, and the form of
time varied according to its function. Cyclic time is often viewed
as cosmological time, whereas the more measured time, in human
terms, is linear, recording generations and individual chronologies.
Where cyclic time takes a spiral form, it can be seen as almost
linear when stretched. This variation can be demonstrated with
reference to Indian time calculation.
Even in cyclic time, the present is not a repetition of the past,
as has been maintained. Each cycle records change. This too has
to be represented, which is done in various ways. Time cycles
are constructed through conjuring up figures from a variety of
sources—magical numbers and their multiples, or the more
precise numbers used by astronomers in their calculations. The
measures of linear time are more realistic, generally concerned
with life-spans or the period of a dynasty. The notion of a past
that is different from the present also assumes a future that is dif-
ferent from both.
4 M. Eliade, Cosmos and History: The Myth of the Eternal Return; idem,
Images and Symbols: Studies in Religious Symbolism; R. Thapar, Time as a
Metaphor of History.
Towards Historical Traditions 53
2. The Historical Traditions of Early India
I would like to turn the focus away from the now dog-eared argu-
ments about the absence of historical writing and consider more
apposite questions of how the past was perceived and recorded
in early India. Throughout the book, in each of the ensuing chap-
ters, these are among the basic questions I try to answer, and they
form key parts of its framework: Did perceptions in early India
encourage notions of historiography? How do we explain the
historiographical variants apparent from different perceptions?
Answers to these questions, even if partial, provide insights.
My interest in looking at the relevant texts afresh has also arisen
because historians are now turning to themes which had earlier
been precluded from history.5 There is now a clear recognition
that groups in society have their own versions of history which,
however fanciful, reflect their particular perception of the past.
These versions can remain discrete or get amalgamated, depend-
ing on the intention of the authors. Even a fabricated version
claiming to be historical tells us much about its authors and their
society. Fabrication may be used as the rhetoric of an ideology, and
the reason for the fabrication has to be sought.6 It does, however,
require the recognition that it is a fabrication.
The historian of early periods is now sensitive to spotting change;
therefore, the consciousness of the past, and its function within
the society showing such consciousness, become relevant ques-
tions when studying early societies. To look for similarities with
Greco-Roman, Chinese, or Arab models of historical writing is
not required when studying the Indian past. It is more pertinent
to analyse the forms in which Indian society has chosen to record
its past. Similarities between these and forms forged in other
civilizations will be self-evident. The more relevant fact is that
historical traditions of the early past differ, for each relates to
a specific society and sometimes even a specific community.
5 J. LeGoff and P. Nora (eds), Constructing the Past.
6 E.J. Hobsbawm, “The Social Function of the Past: Some Questions”, 3–18;
S. Errington, “Style in the Meaning of the Past”, 231–44; J. Siegal, Shadow and
Sound: The Historical Thought of a Sumatran People; M.D. Sahlins, Islands of
History.
54 The Past Before Us
Exploring a particular historical tradition shows its links with
that society and might explain why it takes the particular form
that it does. Furthermore, every society has many pasts, and this
is especially so in a society constituted of multiple social and cul-
tural segments. The records of these many pasts are bound to vary
in form. As regards their content, there are again bound to be oc-
casions when assertions conflict, and others where they cohere.
A comparison of the variants of a narrative recalling the past can
provide insights into the narrative.
Such a shift of emphasis implies raising a number of fresh ques-
tions. A view of the past becomes particularly important at times
of transition and points of change, for this is when the past can
either be rejected, or become a model, or be used to legitimize the
changing present. Because a significant function of history has
been to legitimize those in power, much of the historical writing
which survives from early periods is in the form of statements of
the ruling class and the elite. What others had to say has largely to
be extrapolated from these statements, or from alternative sources,
if any. Attempts at legitimation need not be seen as fraudulent
even if recognized as such. The rules of the game were known and
the texts have to be decoded accordingly. This also requires that
historical traditions be comprehended in terms of the social and
political identities from which they emanate.
Perceptions of major historical change are provided in specific
and varying images of their past within the historical traditions
of particular communities. Underlying the variety, however, what
is significant is the notion of change. Also significant is the idea
that history means viewing the past from a particular perspective,
from a point in time, and that this often also means privileging the
present. Therefore, texts which purport to relate to the past have
also to be placed in their contemporary context. This implies a
relation between the past, the text, and its audience—a relation in
effect between the author, even if anonymous, and the comm unity.
The form in which time is projected is another way of making a
statement. Time is characterized by putting events which are
culturally and socially important into a specific chronology, so the
perspective of those recording these events is inescapable.
Towards Historical Traditions 55
3. The Many Facets of Itihāsa
My focus in this book is on why the past was constructed, recon-
structed, and represented in particular ways, and on whether these
provide evidence of a consciousness of history. I am therefore
concerned with trying to analyse awareness of the past in terms
of historical processes. Is there a sense of change over time, and
how is this recorded? This, in turn, relates to the question of how
the past was used in later times, and the self-perception of certain
segments of society as part of this continuum. Where there are con-
tending views of the same past, these sharpen the particularities
of the perceptions. I will therefore look at the structuring of this
consciousness of the past, and the uses made of the construct.
A fine knowledgeable introduction to the subject that differs
from earlier attempts is to be found in the opening chapter of the
book by Pathak. He scans the Vedas and the Purāṇas and then
focuses on the caritas (historical biographies) of the first millen-
nium ad, suggesting the trajectory in the creation of the historical
tradition. The hero-lauds of the Vedas were not regarded as the
revealed literature of the gods but were nevertheless located in
the collection of hymns. The authors of the narratives were the
Vasiṣṭha priests but the concentration soon moved into the hands
of the Bhṛgvāṅgirasa priests, and they seem to have given direc-
tion to the tradition. The earlier authorship had been that of the
sūtas (bards and genealogists), but they were gradually set aside
and their compositions appropriated as part of the itihāsa-purāṇa
tradition.7
The two terms associated either separately or conjointly with
traditions relating to the past are itihāsa and purāṇa. Itihāsa liter-
ally means “thus indeed it was” and has come to be used now to
mean history, but earlier it was not history in any modern sense of
the term. Mention is also made of aitihāsikas, people who com-
ment on a believed history, but these are sparse.8 Purāṇa means
that which is old and includes events and stories believed to go
7 V.S. Pathak, Ancient Historians of India.
8 Nighantu tathā Nirukta; Nirukta of Yāska, 2.10, 3.19, 4.6.
56 The Past Before Us
back to ancient times. Later, by the first millennium ad, this term
was applied to a specific body of texts, the Purāṇas, which are
primarily focused on particular deities. They become religious
sectarian texts by providing information on myths and rituals as-
sociated with the deity. But some of the Purāṇas have distinctive
sections that are claimed as historical records.
The Atharvaveda and the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa refer to itihāsa
and purāṇa.9 The conjoint term, itihāsa-purāṇa, referring to that
which was believed to have happened in the past, is mentioned
in the Brāhmaṇas and the Upaniṣads of the early to mid-first
millennium bc.10 It is described as the fifth Veda, which makes it
an important but separate branch of knowledge, although the
term included the more esoteric kinds of knowledge, such as
sarpavidyā (serpent lore) and asuravidyā (demonology). Promo-
tion to the status of a fifth Veda was sometimes given to texts
whose subject matter was initially outside the interests of Vedic
Brahmanism but which had a specific importance of their own.
Bharata’s Nāṭyaśāstra and the Mahābhārata are also described as
such. The notion of a fifth Veda could suggest a claim to divine
sanction but not divine revelation. From the perspective of Vedic
Brahmanism it tended to be seen as second-order knowledge. This
might have given the impression that Indian civilization—seen as
brahmanic—was unconcerned with the past as history.
The itihāsa-purāṇa was central to the kṣatriya tradition—the
tradition of the ruling clans—and the Upaniṣads incorporate the
concerns of the kṣatriyas as well as those of some brāhmaṇas
proficient in the Vedas.11 This might also have led to it being called
the fifth Veda. The Vedas make a point of including the gāthās
(hymns) and nārāśaṃsīs (poems in praise of heroes) as part of
itihāsa. The recitation of the itihāsaveda and the purāṇaveda is
recommended during the aśvamedha sacrifice.12 The Nirukta of
9 Atharvaveda, 15.6.4, 11.7.24; Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa 13.4.3.12–13.
10 S. Radhakrishnan, The Principal Upanishads; Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad,
2.4.10; Chāndogya Upaniṣad, 7.1.2, 7.7.1ff.
11 R. Thapar, “Sacrifice, Surplus and the Soul”, in idem, Cultural Pasts,
809–31.
12 Aśvalāyana Śrautasūtra, 10.7; Gopatha Brāhmaṇa, 1.10.
Towards Historical Traditions 57
Yāska, an etymological text, explains the term aitihāsika as one
who uses itihāsa to explain the mantras through narratives relat-
ing the past. (The meaning of mantra was problematic.13) It is also
said that a newborn child should be ritually introduced to the three
Vedas and the itihāsa-purāṇa, or that at the funeral of a guru the
bereaved should stay up all night hearing itihāsa-purāṇa.14
The widest definition of itihāsa is in the Arthaśāstra,15 where it
is associated with a number of more secular forms such as purāṇa
itivṛtta (past events), ākhyāyikā (narrative), udāharaṇa (example),
as well as dharmaśāstra and arthaśāstra (ideas on, respectively,
social and sacred duty, and political economy).16 According to
some, the idea that instruction in the three human values of dharma
(sacred duty), artha (livelihood), kāma (fulfilment of desires),
leading to mokṣa (release from rebirth), was implicit in the nar-
ration of the past described as itihāsa.17 Kings who failed to be
familiar with itihāsa came to grief, but those that knew it suc-
ceeded.18
The Buddhist tradition gives the conventional meaning to
itihāsa but recognizes its association with brahmanical sources.19
Purāṇa is anything which is old, but porana in Pāli is closer in
meaning to purāṇa, implying a written authority. Others are more
particular and Jinasena, the ninth-century Jaina author of the
Ādipurāṇa, defines itihāsa as relating that which actually hap-
pened: he describes it as synonymous with itivṛtta and amnaya
(authentic tradition).
I would like to examine the reconstruction of the past in the
body of literature which is linked to the itihāsa-purāṇa tradition
in order to ascertain whether, in its view of the past, it reflects
13 L. Renou, Études Vediques et Paninéennes, vol. VI, 62ff.
14 Śāṇkhāyana Gṛhyasūtra, 1.24.8; Āśvalāyana Gṛhyasūtra, 4.6.6.
15 The existing text is dated to the early Christian era but incorporates still
earlier sections, some of which may well go back to the Mauryan period.
16 Arthaśāstra, 1.5.
17 Apte, Sanskrit–English Dictionary, 245.
18 Manu’s Code of Law, 7.40–3; Arthaśāstra, 1.5.12, 1.2.6.
19 Pali–English Dictionary, 119; Dialogues of the Buddha: Dīgha Nikāya,
1.88; F.W. Woodward and E.M. Hare (trans.), The Book of Gradual Sayings:
Aṅguttara Nikāya, 1.163; Mahāvastu, ed. E. Senart, 1.556.
58 The Past Before Us
socio-political changes and emphasizes what the authors of this
tradition took to be significant. Where the tradition takes variant
forms, it would be worth investigating whether there is a reso-
nance with actual historical change. The change in the genres
of texts associated with itihāsa is not incidental. It is linked to
the major historical changes that have been examined for the long
period from c. 1000 bc to c. ad 1300, but seen more effectively
as substantially two periods registering difference: one from
c. 1000 bc to c. ad 500 and the second from c. ad 500 to c. ad 1300,
with a gradual change from one to the other in various parts of
the subcontinent.
The categories of texts considered here come from diverse
areas. My purpose is not to offer a comprehensive list of texts
and their analyses. I intend to take a few representative examples
to show the nature of the records as well as what they suggest
in terms of encapsulating a historical tradition. I shall, further,
confine myself to the areas I know best, which are parts of north-
ern India. The time period by definition peters out in the early
second millennium ad. Although historical genres of the late first
millennium ad continue into the second, modern historians tend
to overlook the continuity. The writings of the latter are viewed
generally as being under the influence of Islamic historiography,
rather than as an aspect of the continuity of the pre-Islamic, at
least in some part. The disjunctures of the periodization of Mill
disallow continuities and mutations.
In the absence of deciphered Harappan texts, we have per-
force to begin with the early compositions of the Vedas such as
the Ṛgveda and the Brāhmaṇas, and their hymns and narratives
about heroes. Some segments within larger texts are referred to
as itihāsa, but even a voluminous text such as the Mahābhārata
is classified as such. The purāṇa emerges by the mid-first mil-
lennium ad as a distinct category, although what can be broadly
described as historical constitutes only a part of some Purāṇas.
I have, therefore, selected from among those texts that are either
referred to as itihāsa; or those that are distinctly concerned with a
past which is projected as a statement of events and personalities
believed to be historical.
In the early texts, historical consciousness is to be found in an
Towards Historical Traditions 59
embedded form—veins within the larger structure of texts—and
therefore has to be prised out.20 These are statements that recall
the past, or in referring to the present are aware that the past may
be recalled in the future. They recur primarily in ritual texts, or in
those that may not have been such to begin with but were gradu-
ally converted into sacred texts, such as those discussed below in
Part II. The text itself is not history and retains its function as a
ritual text, or its association with the sacred, but fragments of the
historical tradition grow into the text. These embedded forms are
often origin myths, compositions in praise of heroes, or genealo-
gies of ancient descent groups. Inasmuch as such forms encapsu-
late social assumptions and are used to prescribe conduct for the
present, they are significant as a specific recollection of the past.
Subsequent to this, the genres are more evidently autonomous and
historical, or what I have called “externalized”. Later historical
traditions are articulated in a variety of ways, in forms created
specifically to record history, and more centrally structured around
author, audience, patron, and occasion. It is these changing forms,
in many genres, that I shall be discussing.
The first part of the book looks at the embedded forms up to
the point where they are gradually released from ritual texts. A
gradual emergence of historical consciousness from ritual texts
moves it towards forms that have or claim to have a representation
of the past, such as sections of the Purāṇas, the early inscrip-
tions, and some creative literature—as discussed in Part III. The
alternative Buddhist historical tradition was expressed in a dis-
tinctively different body of texts, more centrally historical. This
is evident in the Buddhist Pāli Canon encapsulating the early his-
tory of Theravāda Buddhism, in the chronicles of the Mahāvihāra
monastery, and in the biographies of the Buddha associated with
northern Buddhism—all considered in Part IV. The texts that are
specifically intended as historical—the royal biographies, inscrip-
tions, and chronicles—are viewed as independent new historical
genres in Part V. It seems to me, therefore, that there is within the
various historical traditions a gradual change from fragments of
20 R. Thapar, “Society and Historical Consciousness: The Itihāsa-purāṇa
Tradition”, 353–83.
60 The Past Before Us
believed history to the setting out of narratives focused on a more
clearly defined history.
u
Since the notion of embedded history is somewhat unfamiliar, let
me explain it in a little more detail. The origins of the itihāsa-
purāṇa tradition go back to forms that are embedded in ritual texts,
and, as accounts of activities of heroes and chiefs, tend to be scat-
tered. Some categories are familiar, such as the dāna-stuti hymns
of the Ṛgveda in praise of generous patrons; or the nārāśaṃsīs and
the ākhyānas (narratives). The inclusion of the narrative as part of
the sacrificial ritual perhaps gave it greater credence in referring
to contemporary heroes, but certainly ensured its continuity since
it would be recalled with each performance of the ritual. Some of
these narratives are called itihāsa.
Variant versions in later texts introduce new features into these
narratives, for the appeal to the past can be to fix a precedent for
action in the present. The Mahābhārata as itihāsa was used on oc-
casion for this purpose. Although rooted in clan society, it demon-
strates the transition to kinship largely through the interpretation
of the later Śānti and Anuśāsana parvans endorsing kingship. In
terms of the polity it represents, the Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa narrates
the victory of kingship over the clan societies of the rākṣasas.
This was all part of the raw material of what was incorporated
into the later compilation of the itihāsa-purāṇa tradition. The
incorporation changed the form. Genealogies went into greater
depth in the epics than in the Vedic hymns. In the genealogical
section of the early Purāṇas—the vaṃśānucarita—these were
ex panded into patterns of vaṁśas, or succession lists, and put
together in a written form in the early centuries ad, thus repre-
senting a construction of the past referring back to earlier times
and based on earlier material.
Such a construction of genealogical patterns, reflecting percep-
tions of the past, evolves out of the embedded form and comes
to be used in the more evidently historical texts, such as the cari -
tas (biographies) and the vaṃśāvalīs (chronicles) of the period
Towards Historical Traditions 61
subsequent to the seventh century ad. The evolution of these con-
structions therefore assumes importance and has to be examined.
I shall initially consider the embedded forms found in the Vedic
corpus, the epics—the Mahābhārata, and the Rāmāyaṇa—and in
the genealogical sections of the Purāṇas, as the sources of many
concepts which become more central later in the rather different,
externalized, embodied forms of the tradition.
This more externalized historical form, embodied in specific
texts distinct from earlier ones, comprises biographies of rulers
or those in authority, set in a conventionally recognizable form;
and chronicles which come either in a literary format, or more
concisely in inscriptions. The reading of inscriptions in recent
times has focused on information relating to chronology, dynastic
history, and economic change, and has tended to overlook the fact
that a few are a literal embodiment of historical consciousness.21
Free-standing inscriptions, as on pillars, were re-used from earliest
times.22 Similarly, the re-use of architectural fragments may have
been because of their historical identity, although there are other
explanations. Styles can be borrowed, as in the Gupta period emu-
lation of the capitals of Aśokan pillars. Such re-use and imitations
make many statements and lead to many questions. Why were
particular objects selected, and what meaning did they convey?
Re-use is both an act of inheriting the past and translating it. It is
one of the ways of making the past visible, both as an object and
in its symbolic meaning.
Any codification of the past tends to be selective, and the rea-
sons for making a particular selection are significant to the actual
selection. The itihāsa-purāṇa tradition, as I hope to show, came
to constitute the core of what may be described as one kind of
historical thinking. This includes variations in the working over
of the tradition, which moved from a heroic to a courtly phase,
and from clan societies to kingdoms, although elements of the first
21 As for example the reading by various historians of inscriptions, such
as these: “The Junagadh Rock Inscription of Skandagupta”, J.F. Fleet, Cor-
pus Inscriptionum Indicarum, vol. III, 56ff.; “Junagadh Rock Inscription of
Rudradāman”, Ep. Ind., 8, 36ff.; The Allahabad Posthumous Stone Pillar Inscrip-
tion of Samudragupta, in J.F. Fleet, Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, 1ff.
22 F.B. Flood, “Pillars, Palimpsests and Princely Practices”, 95–116.
62 The Past Before Us
continued into the second. There were, of course, other parallel
traditions, equally important in their own right, incorporating
a historical consciousness but taking variant forms. The bardic
tradition was among these, and the tension between the courtly
and the bardic remains an undercurrent. The retrieval of the oral
bardic tradition for the early period is problematic since the oral
compositions were given a literary form overriding the oral. In
addition, there were interpolations from a literary authorship
which further smothered the oral. The Buddhist and Jaina tradi-
tions were important in recording other persons and events in a
different framework.
Texts within the rubric of the itihāsa-purāṇa tradition were not
examined carefully as representing history because they recorded
events that, as noted earlier, were not of central importance to co-
lonial historians. But there was in them a concern with legitimacy
as part of origins and status; they show that political power was
open and contested; they refer to relations between the state and
other important institutions; from them it is evident there was no
state religion, although the establishing of a state was often ac-
companied by both royal patronage to those organized religious
sects which had a substantial following, as well as the building of
temples, and in some instance stūpas, as political statements.
The establishing of a state encouraged the writing of official
versions of its history. This was articulated in a somewhat scattered
and fragmentary form in Prākrit and early Sanskrit inscriptions
(c. third century bc to second century ad). These were the precur-
sors to a more systematic coverage of dynasties through inscrip-
tions issued after the mid-first millennium ad.
u
Attempts at invoking history were made by the dramatist Viśākha-
datta, in about the fifth–sixth century ad. He chose to reconstruct
historical moments, as in the shift in power from the Nandas to
the Mauryas, or a narrative about Cȧndra Gupta II. Viśākhadatta’s
plays remain virtually the only examples of a focused historical
drama. These were forays in the Gupta period, and, soon after, at
releasing history from ritual texts by providing it with new genres.
Towards Historical Traditions 63
This may have been encouraged through some dialogue with the
Sramanic historical traditions, although such a dialogue is not
mentioned. The latter were not divorced from religious intent;
nevertheless they did attempt to give centrality to history—as
they viewed it.
Other influential views came from various Sramanic sects and
were expressed primarily in the literature of the Buddhists and
Jainas. Monasteries, as the institutional centres for preserving the
Buddhist and Jaina historical tradition, maintained chronicles of
monastic and sectarian activities, not to mention the other litera-
ture of such religious sects which referred to the past. A range of
reasons could be suggested for this different perspective, among
them the historicity of the founders, the breaking away from what
has been regarded as orthodoxy or orthopraxy, the importance of
eschatology, the social background of the patrons of these sects,
the initial urban and literate milieu of the teaching, the institu-
tionalization of sects as orders, the need to maintain versions of
sectarian conflicts among these orders as well as their property
relations, and the interplay between the religious order and politi-
cal power.
The dialogue between the Brahmanic and Sramanic views of
the past is implicit in a few genealogies and biographies but is
not directly referred to. Nevertheless, the awareness of alterna-
tive views and traditions is apparent. The choice of royal patrons
from history differs: the patrons of each are projected as separate
and distinct subjects of the history as recorded by the various
sects. The Buddhist monastic chronicles of Sri Lanka, such as
the Dīpavaṃsa and the Mahāvaṃsa of the mid-first millennium
ad, reveal much early history by drawing on the history of India
associated with the coming of Buddhism to Sri Lanka, in which
Aśoka is made to play a major role. In the Mahāyāna of Northern
Buddhism, the representation of Indian history is more evident
in the Avadāna texts and in the biographies of rulers and teach-
ers. Of these, the Aśokāvadāna attempts to give an interpretation
of the activities of Aśoka Maurya, and clearly from a Northern
Buddhist perspective.
Historical writing of a recognizable kind—no longer embedded
in ritual texts—emerged in post-Gupta times. It takes three distinct
64 The Past Before Us
forms: caritas, praśastis, and vaṃśāvalīs. Caritas, or historical
biographies, were written primarily as kāvyas but inevitably in-
corporated historical views. The earliest and most successful was
Bāṇabhaṭṭa’s Harṣacarita, which captures the historical ambience
of the early seventh century and the attempt by Harṣa to acquire
sovereignty. The second is Sandhyākaranandin’s Rāmacarita,
later in date, and which provides a perspective on a rebellion by
landowning intermediaries.
Many inscriptions subsequent to the seventh century ad can be
read additionally as dynastic annals, listing the dynasty chrono-
logically and providing some information on events. I shall be
illustrating this by examining the inscriptions of the Candellas,
a dynasty chosen at random, but representative of the kingdoms
of those times. These inscriptions follow a fairly uniform pat-
tern, since the administration and economy of northern India of
this period tend to be similar. The section of the inscription that
carries historical information about the dynasty is the praśasti,
which is in effect a eulogy on the kings and their achievements.
The inscriptions of individual kings when read seriatim, read like
a chronicle.
Historical traditions of a more elaborate kind, where histori-
cal events are central, are found in the vaṃśāvalīs, the chronicles
maintained in some kingdoms where it was felt that their status
required it. The most impressive example is, of course, Kalhaṇa’s
Rājataraṅgiṇī, long recognized as such. I shall be juxtaposing the
vaṃśāvalī from Chamba with the Rājataraṅgiṇī because it comes
from the adjoining state, and, although inferior by comparison
with Kalhaṇa’s work, nevertheless has some characteristics of the
genre. Similar to these but from a contrasting ideological posi-
tion is the Prabandha-cintāmaṇi of Merutuṅga, composed in the
fourteenth century ad. This is a history of the dynasties of Gujarat
with a focus on the Caulukyas. Merutuṅga, as a Jaina author, has
concerns rather different from those of Kalhaṇa.
4. Historical Change and the Emergence of
Historical Traditions
In an analysis of early historical traditions, a familiarity with
the historical background that forms the social, political, and
Towards Historical Traditions 65
economic context to the traditions is helpful, since these tradi-
tions are shaped by the requirements of their contexts. If Indian
historical traditions are to be read in the way that I think they
were intended, then we have to relate them to the dialectic of
their history.
There were obvious processes of change in the institutional-
izing of power and resources, from the early societies to the later,
more complex, forms. This would also have affected the manner
in which the changes were legitimized. These changes are fun-
damental to understanding why historical traditions mattered,
and the form they took. I am arguing that there were changes in
historiographical perceptions and genres of writing in the period
subsequent to the mid-first millennium ad; therefore, historical
change needs to be probed to see if the historical perceptions
coincide with this change.
The basic premise of colonial writing on early history was, as
we saw, that Indian society was static and registered no change,
which argument in large part accounted for an absence of his-
torical consciousness. Although this statement was not seriously
questioned by nationalist historical writing, it has been disproved
by investigations into history during the last six decades. The
recognition of historical change is in part what has encouraged
the search for historical traditions, even if only marginally so far.
Since my discussion of these traditions derives from the fact of
change, and their ways of reflecting the change, I would like to
briefly indicate the background that I have in mind when I write
about the historical context.
At the level of a broad generalization, I would like to propose
that there is evidence for two recognizable forms of organizing
societies in early India. The earlier form was that of clan societies.
This was followed later by kingdoms, although in some situations
and periods of time the two could and did coexist. This observa-
tion about the context might also explain why the functions and
forms of the historical traditions changed from earlier to later
periods. The two forms, clans and kingdoms, were not always ex-
clusively demarcated: there were overlaps and some continuities;
and although on occasion they coexisted, one of the two would be
prominent at a particular time and place. Since reference will
frequently be made in this book to clan societies and kingdoms,
66 The Past Before Us
the two basic forms, it would be best to define these terms at
the start.23
A beginning can be made with the definition of a lineage-based
society.24 Identity in such a society derived from the clan—a cor -
porate group of unilineal kin united by an actual or fictive genea-
logical bond. Persons within the same lineage would trace
themselves to the same ancestor.25 The extended family was the
smallest effective social cell. Kinship recognized social ties and
controlled a variety of functions within the society. The relation-
ship among members was stated in kinship terms and involved
claims and obligations. This explains the insistence on genealogies,
fictive or actual, an insistence that was carried over in records of
royal descent.
Genealogies became records of identity, both of the past and
the present. They are important to two processes in clan societies:
one is fission, which is when a large clan can break up and estab-
lish smaller ones, some of whom might migrate; and the other is
fusion, which is when a few clans come together to form a large
lineage group, or induct new clans and form a confederacy. Gene-
alogies, combined with clan myths, can help keep track of these
processes. A cluster of clans, dwelling in proximity and claim -
ing to be connected, could constitute the largest unit, the jana,
sometimes translated as the tribe.26 Groups descended from a
particular ancestor could be recorded as segments, and social
organization would be seen as a network of segments, some con-
nected through kinship.
A person was identified through his or her clan as a conseq uence
of being born into it or claiming so. Marriage alliances involving
the exchange of women were significant within this. There were
23 R. Thapar, From Lineage to State.
24 The word “lineage” has varied interpretations in anthropological literature,
not all of which are in agreement. My use of the word derives from its basic
meaning, namely, that a lineage consists of those who trace their origin to a
common ancestor, actual or fictitious, and who claim to have connections in
the same descent group.
25 E. Evans-Pritchard, The Nuer.
26 However, the word “tribe” has been used for such varied situations in the
Indian context that it has almost become meaningless. Many scholars prefer to
substitute it by lengthier descriptions, as I am trying to do.
Towards Historical Traditions 67
rules of endogamy and exogamy which, in effect, stipulated the
clans within which a person could and could not marry. These
rules underlined the importance of identity as well as the pattern
through which women were exchanged. Each clan was relatively
egalitarian, although the families of chiefs had a higher status and
greater wealth. Considerations of power were expressed through
authority vested in seniority, with age as a social marker and the
focus of respect. Lineages were ordered hierarchically, and this
ordering, if so required, could be recorded or reformulated in gen-
ealogical or other forms even at a stage subsequent to that order-
ing. Because of this hierarchy, some lineages were better placed
than others for access to resources. The initial stratification was in
terms of a ruling lineage or senior line, and lesser lineages or cadet
lines. Lineage-based societies generally maintained some record
of their past heroes and events.
Where agro-pastoralism was the main activity, as was the case
in early India, herding was the source of wealth. The more effec-
tive method of increasing livestock was through raids conducted
by the clans, as is evident not only from the Vedas but also the
many hero-stones of later times, memorializing heroes who died
defending the village cattle. Cattle were valuable items of wealth
and consequently were given and received as gifts. Pastoralism
did not exclude agriculture, undertaken largely by the cadet lines,
the produce being offered ritually to the ruling families. The liveli-
hood of such societies would have permitted them to live only in
huts, though of course poetic description could convert the huts
into fantasy palaces. Wealth was in the form of prestations, of-
ferings, and gifts to the chief. Some would be distributed among
clansmen, depending on their function, but the more substantial
amount was both consumed in the ritual and given to those per-
forming the ritual. As a form of exchange, the priest legitimized
the status of the chief and invoked the blessings of the gods—an
intangible gift; in return the priest received the tangible gift of
material wealth from the chief.
Such distributions were not arbitrary. Rights of usage extended
to land, both pasture land and arable land. In such conditions, land
tended to be treated as patrimony rather than commodity. It was
not private property, but jointly owned by the clan and, like the
lineage name, constituted another form of identity for the clan. A
68 The Past Before Us
degree of migration is inherent in such societies: pastoralists need
new grazing grounds and accessible water resources, and shifting
cultivators have to clear new land every few years.
Two categories of persons existed outside the lineage: the
men of religion and ritual; and those outside the cadet lines who
laboured for the clan. The latter did not share the identity of the
clan and were segregated. Possibly, in this process, some were
reduced to a status equivalent to that of slaves. Both these cat-
egories observed their own social codes. The former organized
the rituals, with the more effective ceremonial gatherings tending
to become clan assemblies. Some among these ritual specialists
were shamans, but, in tandem with a clan’s increasing importance,
a regular category of priests came to perform rituals. Worship
ranged from animism to deities of various kinds. Places of worship
were selected when and where required. Ritual specialists were
also associated with clan polity. There were among them those who
memorized traditions about the past and narrated these on special
occasions, an activity also linked to bards and poets.
The chief had to be the hero, and it was the function of the
poet-priest to make him one: hence the significance of hero-lauds
and ballads. Such poems were generally not very long, but they
imbued the chief with the qualities that made him seem excep-
tional. The recitations of these were when the clan assembled
and reiterated, as it were, its identity. Thus the songs in praise of
the chief were important both to the chief and to the clan. If the
priest had a special role in bestowing on the hero power drawn
from the gods, the poet had a special role in marking out the hero
as extraordinary. What made him special were both his actions in
protecting the clan and his generosity in distributing the offerings
that he had acquired. Clan societies had little hesitation in declar-
ing their material needs. The prayer for wealth runs like a chorus
through their literature, probably reflecting the need to cope with
difficult environments.
This was the bare structure of a clan system. There were vari-
ants within this system, with different emphases. The texts mention
at least three kinds of clans. One comprised forest-dwelling clans
living away from settlements, referred to as aṭavikas. The differ-
ence of environment between forest-dwellers and cultivators is
encapsulated in the two terms commonly contrasted: the araṇya
Towards Historical Traditions 69
or the vana was the wilderness or the forest, the unpredictable
unknown; and the grāma or the kṣetra was the settlement, orderly
and familiar. Gradually, the former was encroached upon by the
latter, most frequently by clearing parts of the forest for cultiva-
tion. Slowly, over the centuries, the vana was domesticated and
became the romantic backdrop to many narratives.
The clan system is also reflected in a second category, that
of the viś (clan) of Vedic society, comprising agro-pastoralists
settled in villages (grāmas), as were similar clans described in
the Mahābhārata. The forest was still the unknown, but since the
settlement was more secure the forest was becoming familiar.
The third category of clans was made up of powerful clan soci-
eties of long-established cultivators and where social hierarchies
were not absent. These were the gaṇa-saṅghas/gaṇa-rājyas—clans
or assemblies of clans—which formed the earlier stratum in
northern Indian society. These are perhaps better described as
oligarchies and chiefships. They were more complex than the
clans of the Vedas and the Mahābhārata, boasting of urban cen-
tres that were not only the seats of government, handling revenue
and administration, but also centres for the exchange of goods.
Such centres provided the context to the sophisticated thinking
of Mahāvīra and the Buddha. The Pāli Buddhist Canon depicts
these societies in greater detail, the Buddha having belonged to the
gaṇa-saṅgha of the Śākyas and much admired the system. Inscrip-
tions and coins establish their continuity to the early centuries ad
in other areas, existing conjointly with kingdoms.
Some among these categories were firmly committed to the
clan system, but a few were beginning to hover on the edges of
kingship. This ambiguity is reflected in the tensions depicted in
the Mahābhārata and Rāmāyaṇa over forms of control, authority,
and power.
Kingship emerged in the middle Ganges plain in about the mid-
first millennium bc. It is associated with a number of significant
changes. The increasing tendency to invest greater authority in
the person of the family of the chief is a reflection of one such
mutation. This was expressed through a range of rituals. But in
effect it was dependent on the accumulation of wealth by the chief
which, unlike earlier times, was not gifted or destroyed through
the ritual of sacrifices but was retained by the chief aspiring to
70 The Past Before Us
kingship. Together with this came the intensification of agricul-
ture, providing greater wealth, assisted by the introduction of a
more extensive iron technology by the mid-first millennium bc
in both agricultural and artisanal production. The latter led to
the creation of centres of exchange, and some of these grew into
urban centres, initiating a new urban culture. Basic to this change
was greater hierarchy in society, now regulated through caste, and
the use of śūdras and untouchables as labour. The complexity of
social organization, which became greater over time, required
governance by a central figure with more individual rights than
had been known in clan societies. Kingship slowly emerged and
eventually became the norm.
The shift towards kingship was strengthened by the idea of
a state, since the office of the king was an accrual of power and
was viewed as symbolizing the state. The state was effective in
a society divided into hierarchical groups, and in this case the
stratification was by caste. This was visualized as the varṇāśrama-
dharma in the brahmanical Dharmaśāstras.The emergence of
kingdoms was coterminous with the gradual marginalization of
clan society. Groups that claimed control in kingdoms did so not
through kinship but through coercive agencies, drawing legiti-
macy for themselves by appropriating resources and technologies,
maintaining however that they had divine sanction.
Gradually, kinship became less important and the functional
roles of non-kin persons at the upper levels of society replaced
the network of kinship. The political authority of the chief of the
clan increased, not only via claims to divine sanction, but also as a
consequence of his being accepted as the protector of people, law,
and order. His claim to wages in return for this function took the
form of a stipulated share of the revenue collected from all that
was produced. Those dependent on his authority were no longer
kinsmen but non-kin subjects. An echo of the previous system lay
in their being referred to as prajā (literally “children”), or prakṛti
(literally “nature”). Appropriations of various kinds also encour-
aged the demarcation of territory into kingdoms.
The term rājā has been translated as “king” quite consistently,
without much thought given to the political system within which
the word is used. It is possible to argue that rājā was initially the
word used for the chief of the clan, and that its etymology came
Towards Historical Traditions 71
from *raj, meaning one who shines or is at the forefront. The fre-
quency of rājan, and then of rājanya, in the Vedic corpus would
tend to support this reading. The context is not that of a king at the
head of a state or a kingdom. Although the term mahārāja does
occur sporadically in the Vedic corpus, it is more in the sense of a
great chief rather than the altogether different office of king.27 As
a title mahārāja is adopted quite late in the post-Mauryan period
by the Indo-Bactrian Greeks, and by Khāravela of Kaliṅga.28 It
occurs frequently in the Pāli Canon, but again not in the sense of
a great king. Its earlier use often suggests chiefs and kings accord-
ing to the context of use; its later use, when as mahārāja it claims
greater royal authority, suggests a kingdom.29
Kingdoms, when they emerged, were hostile to the gaṇa-
saṅghas, which they saw as an alternative system challenging
the new polity. The major conflict in the fifth century bc in eastern
India was between the Vṛjjis—a confederacy of gaṇa-saṅgha
clans—and the newly emerged kingdom of Magadha, the victory
of Magadha being a turning point in favour of kingship. This
hostility is also highlighted in the Arthaśāstra.30 The aṭavikas,
regarded as inferior, meet greater hostility from both Kauṭilya and
Aśoka.31 The ostensible reason seems to be that they were resisting
the encroachment of the king’s armies into their forests. However,
the two were not always at the extremities of political relations,
and there were some convergences—although these generally
meant the acceptance of kingship by the clan society.
Kingdoms are easier to define since they are frequently men-
tioned in the texts. The contrast with clan society is perhaps best
captured in Kauṭilya’s definition of a state, where he lists its seven
limbs or constituents, the saptāṅga: svāmi, amātya, janapada,
27 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 1.6.4.21, 2.5.4.9, 4.3.3.17.
28 A coin of Eucratides carries the title. Recently, the date has been taken to
180 bc with the legend on a coin of Apollodotus I Soter as mahārājasa trātarasa
apaladātasa; Hathigumpha Inscription of Khāravela, Ep. Ind., XX, 72ff.
29 D.C. Sircar argues that mahārāja—as a title, as against being just a refer-
ence to a respected rājā—goes back to translations of Indo-Greek titles, and
that there may also have been some influence of Achaemenian titles: Indian
Epigraphy, 1965, 33ff.
30 Arthaśāstra, 11.1.
31 J. Bloch, Les Inscriptions d’Asoka, 129.
72 The Past Before Us
durga, kośa, daṇḍa, mitra. The svāmi (king) emerges as the head
of a ruling family and the focus of power, and is generally ex-
pected to be of kṣatriya status—although Kauṭilya does not make
this point. The king is assisted by amātyas (administrators and
senior ministers), who are not his kinsmen and are selected from
other competent persons. This is distinctly different from the
chief relying on his kinsmen. The janapada rāṣṭra (territory of
the kingdom) had to be defined and boundaries were generally
frontier zones. The centre of governance is the durga (the capital),
where the king resides and which is also the location of the kośa
(the treasury), where the revenue is brought and stored. This again
differs from clan society, where offerings brought to the chief were
either consumed or distributed but not accumulated. The lack of
accumulation accounts in part for the continuation of clan society,
since it prevents resources being controlled by a single person.
What is meant by access to resources and the revenue thereof
was significantly different in clan societies and kingdoms. The
revenue in kingdoms came from regularly collected taxes by
designated officers, and initially the terms used for taxes were the
same as those used for offerings—bali, bhāga, śulka. The taxes
came from land, some individually cultivated for the state, some
for wealthy landowners. Common ownership by the clan was not
the norm. Items produced for sale and exchange were also taxed.
The system was sustained by a larger range of activities, demand-
ing labour and greater specialization.
The collection and utilization of resources as revenue, differen-
tiated in the two systems, are sometimes referred to as reciproc-
ity and redistribution. Reciprocity is a one-to-one exchange on
various occasions where resources are transferred formally from
the recipient to others who are participants in the action. Rituals
of sacrifice, such as the rājasūya and the aśvamedha, are such
occasions. Offerings, constituting the wealth of the clan, are col-
lected by the yajamāna, the patron of the sacrifice, and used in the
ritual. What remains is given as a gift and a fee to the priests. The
system of redistribution, on the other hand, is more appropriate to
kingdoms where wealth, in the form of revenue, is collected by
officers and brought to the treasury, from where the king disperses
it to support functions of state.
The two remaining constituents are daṇḍa (force), and mitra
Towards Historical Traditions 73
(ally). Governance required maintaining an army of professional
soldiers. This was a departure from the clan system, where all
clansmen fought when the need arose. Now the king, the capital,
and the treasury had to be constantly protected. Sometimes the
word daṇḍa is used in place of bala. This includes punishment and,
by extension, the rule of law. The right to coercion was a conces-
sion to the king, who was governing subjects with varied identi-
ties. And finally, there was the need for an ally, cultivated through
diplomacy: allies were required for relations between kingdoms,
and on occasion formalized through a matrimonial alliance.
Kingdoms and state systems are characterized by strong pol-
itical and social hierarchies that are evident in various forms.
From the Gupta period onwards, when there is a quantitative
and qualitative change in the complexities of state authority and
governance, the range of intermediaries (some would call them
feudatories) increased, accompanied by an increase in the titles
used and permitted. In some cases they became quite lengthy, but
the length of a title was more a convention of status than a literal
reflection of power. Rājā and mahārāja gave way to the superior
mahārājādhirāja, one among many other titles.
These were a reflection of a further political and economic
change, which took the form of gradually increasing numbers of
grants of land in post-Gupta times. Such land grants were to
brāhmaṇas who had performed rituals to legitimize power, or
to ward off evil; and in similar numbers to administrators who
had served the king well; and to Buddhist monasteries. These
grants created a category of intermediaries, or feudatories, who
occupied the space between the cultivator and the king, and who
became recipients of what had earlier been revenue for the king.
The merchant and the artisan was a partially parallel system in
terms of providing revenue to the state. This was the broad basis
of the relationship, although there were variants and adjustments
at each level. The well-established and better-off intermediaries
saw themselves as potential kings and competed with one another
to acquire a throne. In the establishing of these relationships and
claims, there was much recourse to earlier historical traditions for
purposes of legitimizing rule.
The emergence of a caste-ordered society represented another
form of control. Social divisions and distinctions were now sharper
74 The Past Before Us
than they had been among clans. The hierarchy was more marked,
with an emphasis on the subordination of those at the lower end
of society. The relatively egalitarian tendency of clan society was
eroded. This is sometimes referred to as the movement from jana
to jāti, or from clan to caste. Competition for political authority
being relatively open, its legitimation was sought from myths of
origin and lineage links. Control over narratives about the past
therefore became useful, if not necessary.
Caste society endorses varṇāśrama-dharma, the code defined
by one’s social status and age. These were duties and obligations
in accordance with one’s caste, and encapsulated social hierar-
chies. Varṇa has been defined as ritual status, which automatically
accentuates hierarchy. This was underlined in the importance
given to the dvija (the twice-born), a term initially used only for
the brāhmaṇa but later sometimes extended to the next two, the
kṣatriya and vaiśya. The term kṣatriya drew on kṣatra (power),
and vaiśya on viś (the clan). The fourth, the śūdra, was invariably
rated low.
In this hierarchy, those outside the system of the four castes
were placed outside the pale of caste society and referred to as
mleccha. This category included forest-dwellers, caṇḍālas, and
others ranked below the śūdra and treated as untouchables, and
those seen as alien to the prevailing culture. This was the norma-
tive framework of the varṇāśrama-dharma which a society was
expected to observe. But in fact it was not universally observed.
At the lower levels the important component was not varṇa but
jāti, closely identified by birth and occupation. This was in many
ways more central to the functioning of caste. What is of interest
is that the rules of jāti functioning had some affinity with those
of the clan. The permanency of segregation between caste groups
and those outside the system was maintained by insisting that
the brāhmaṇas were the purest, the śūdras much less so, and the
untouchables maximally polluted. The latter two provided labour
and this was ensured by insisting on their exclusion.
In the post-Gupta phase the focus shifted to the kingdom and
the varied forms that this kind of state could take, the movement
being towards control by the few, leading to greater complexity.
Clan society was now subordinate. The expansion of kingdoms
Towards Historical Traditions 75
occurred through two main processes. One was the usual and
familiar act of conquering and annexing new areas. The other
was more subtle and perhaps particular to the Indian experience.
Clan societies were converted to caste societies and incorporated
into the kingdom, a historical process brought to the attention
of historians by D.D. Kosambi.32 This change could come about
through assimilation, involving changes in occupation, or through
confrontation. The range of societies thus incorporated into
the caste structure included those that had earlier been hunter-
gatherers, forest-dwellers, pastoralists, shifting cultivators, and
peasant groups, where clan affiliation was not too distant. The
record of confrontations between relatively egalitarian clans, or
of conquest, is evident in the sources. However, the confrontation
between kingdoms and the societies to be incorporated through the
appropriation of resources and conversion to caste is less evident.
Yet the historical tradition records this change as well.
Ideologies play a significant role in these processes, drawing
on a range of ideas—from belief systems to rational enquiries.
Frequently, the coercion is carried out through a hegemonic ideo-
logy, generally of a religious sect. This hegemonic form of control
is evident in some constructions and representations of the past
which provide legitimacy to an authority either already estab-
lished, or just prior to being so.
Constructions of the past gradually took shape. The movement
from lineage-based societies at various stages to kingdoms was
a continuous process of historical change even in the centuries
ad—although by now kingdoms had become the norm—with clan
societies continuing to exist in the more remote areas.
5. Continuities in Historiographical Traditions
after ad 1300
The long section above attempts to provide the background to why
one may expect a change in historical perceptions over the period
of two millennia which may be called early India. The forms that
32 D.D. Kosambi, The Culture and Civilisation of Ancient India in Historical
Outline, 140ff.
76 The Past Before Us
I have underlined change roughly halfway through. But it is not
as if in ad 1300 the forms from the latter part of this period died
out. They continued as parallel traditions or were transmuted. I
would like to mention these, although they will not be discussed
further.
The arrival of the Turks, Afghans, and Mughals did not ter-
minate the importance of the itihāsa-purāṇa tradition, which, al-
though no longer dominant at the capitals of these new kingdoms,
was still fostered in those where legitimation continued to be
drawn from an earlier historical tradition. Sometimes the new rul-
ers were incorporated into the old tradition. Although the Buddhist
tradition died down in the kingdoms of the plains, it continued
in the Himalayan region and Tibet. That of the Jainas continued
in western India, where there were large Jaina communities. The
bardic tradition underwent reinvigoration, as evident in the many
compositions on kings and local heroes.
Historiography linked to Islamic ideology in India is treated
as a monolith. Yet, as I have suggested, there are at least three
ideological variations that gave shape to different facets of this
historiography: the Arabic, the Turkish, and the Persian, all of
which had diverse antecedents. Such diverse legacies would
have produced histories with nuances reflecting diversity. These
nuances were important to the internalizations of Islamic histori-
ography in India. Historical texts from the courts of the Sultans,
and later of the Mughals, were an extension of the chronicle form
but with more detail on events and persons. Together with these,
inscriptions in the languages of those in authority continued as
historical records.
An inscription of the thirteenth century provides an example
of how some of the essential features of earlier official documents
and chronicles were continued into later times.33 The inscription
was not a royal document, for it was issued during the reign of
Ghiyāsuddīn Balban (1266–86), then Sultan of Delhi, by a mer-
chant, Uḍḍhāra, who lived in Ḍhillī/Delhi and is described as a
ṭhakkura, i.e. a man of status. His family came originally from
33 Palam Baoli Inscription, in P. Prasad, Sanskrit Inscriptions of Delhi Sul-
tanate 1191–1526, 3ff.
Towards Historical Traditions 77
Ucca, located in the confluence zone of the rivers of the Punjab
and the Indus. This suggests commercial links between that area
and the Doab. The inscription records the building of a dharmaśālā
or inn for travellers (used by travelling merchants) as well as a
baoli or large step-well.
The inscription opens with a salutation to the deities Gaṇapati
and Śiva. It states that the land of Hariyānaka (where Delhi is
located) was earlier ruled by the Rajput Tomaras and Cauhānas
and is now ruled by the Śakas. The latter term is used sometimes
for Turkish and Afghan rulers and harks back to the Śakas of
antiquity, who also came from Central Asia via Afghanistan. The
previous sultans are correctly listed, even if the conquests of
some among them are poetic fancy, and in this the listing recalls
the hyperbole of some earlier Sanskrit inscriptions, where it was
also required that the current ruler be mentioned. The highpoint
is the remark that even Viṣṇu now sleeps peacefully because of
the (righteous) reign of Sultan Balban. The donor’s genealogy is
given, both of his father and mother, as well as details about his
siblings, stepbrothers, and sisters. Significantly, mention is made of
a separate vaṃśāvalī (chronicle) which records the genealogies of
the families in greater detail; the reference is doubtless to a precur-
sor of the family genealogies of the dominant castes, maintained to
this day at various pilgrimage centres. It further states that Pandit
Yogeśvara composed the inscription and gives the precise date of
1333 in the Vikrama era, the equivalent of ad 1276.
Similar inscriptions are available from other sites in the vicinity
of Delhi, and of the same century.34 Hariyāna is described as the
territory where Kṛṣṇa Vāsudeva and Arjuna roamed, thus recalling
a connection from the Mahābhārata and the Purāṇas. The sultan,
Muhammad Tughluq, is referred to as a Śaka and as “a crest jewel
of all the rulers of the earth”, a phrase familiar from earlier times.
A detailed genealogy is given of the merchant who had had the
well built. The inscription concludes with the name of the author
and is dated with precision. Another inscription, also a eulogy
on a merchant family responsible for constructing a well, carries
34 Naraina Stone Inscription, in P. Prasad, Sanskrit Inscriptions of Delhi
Sultanate 1191–1526, 22ff.
78 The Past Before Us
the statement that the city of Delhi had been built by the Tomara
Rajputs, who were succeeded by the Cauhānas, who were in turn
conquered by Shahabuddin Muhammad of Ghor.35 The latter is
referred to as a mleccha, indicating someone outside the pale of
caste society and, by extension, generally of low status. But here it
was probably being used merely as a term of social demarcation.
It is unlikely that a term of contempt would be used for a sultan
in such an inscription. The current ruler, Muhammad Tughluq,
is described as a turuṣka, the term used for Turks and for those
coming from Central Asia.36
On other occasions attempts were made to trace the ancestry of
sultans to kṣatriya lineages, or to link the origins of local dynasties
to Islamic historiography. For example, the Kotihar inscription of
1369 from Kashmir records the construction of a dharma-maṭha
and refers to the ruling king Shahabadena/Shihab-ud-din. The
eulogy evokes Gaṇeśa and Śiva and then refers to Shihab-ud-din
as having been born in the house of the Pāṇḍavas, and goes on
to list his conquests.37 This new historiographical tradition was
available in the chronicles often maintained in the courts of the
Sultans. The earlier fashion in Sanskrit for writing biographies
surfaced occasionally even in these courts. Chronicles in the re-
gional languages were written along the traditional lines. This
literature requires to be investigated in historiographical terms,
as well as for its articulation of local perspectives, and is likely to
yield interesting insights on historical perceptions.
Such inscriptions indicate that, even among those who were not
members of the ruling families or part of the nobility, there was a
continuation in the format of the record from pre-Islamic times.
Some chronicles in the courts of the Sultans and the Mughals
35 Sarban Stone Inscription, ibid., 27ff.
36 Interestingly, Kalhaṇa refers to the Kuṣāṇas as turuṣkas, which probably
related to their Central Asian origin since they were not Turks. The use of the
term is a back projection for those who came from Central Asia: Rājataraṅgiṇī,
1.170, 8.3412.
37 B.K. Kaul, Corpus of Sharada Inscriptions from Kashmir, 113–18; J.
Tod, Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan; Veraval Inscription at Junagadh of
AD 1264, where the Hijri era is referred to as rasūla-muhammada-samvat: Ep.
Ind., 34, 141ff.
Towards Historical Traditions 79
stemmed from a different historiography, but these did not oust
the earlier forms. An understanding of the earlier forms therefore
provides insights even into later writing. The inscriptions point to
the continuation of a tradition in some formal documents which
accompanied the making of grants, gifts, and charitable endow-
ments, as well as those commemorating a notable act.
It is significant that not merely was the form continued, but
that it was thought necessary to provide what we today would
call a historical context to the statement, with the inclusion of a
brief history and precise date. Into this historical context is set
the immediate history of the individual donor through the genea-
logical details of his family and a reference to his caste. One has
the impression that this “history” was essential in order to give
authenticity to the statement. That such history was more on the
model of the earlier tradition, than on that of the contemporary
court chronicles of the sultans, would be partly conditioned by
it being the statement of a merchant and not a member of the
court, and by it being composed in Sanskrit and not in Turkish
or Persian—which were yet to take root even in the court at Delhi.
This lack of uniformity again seems to reflect the many parallel
coexisting ways for the expression of historical consciousness.
An aspect of the continuing presence of history which is sel-
dom recognized is the use made of objects from the past. The
most dramatic example is the pillar erected by Aśoka Maurya,
originally placed in Kauśāmbi but later shifted to the Allahabad
fort. The date of shifting is uncertain. Firuz Tughluq shifted
some Aśokan pillars but it is unlikely that he moved this one as
the fort at Allahabad was built by Akbar in the late sixteenth
century. The pillar just outside the gateway of the fort may have
been shifted around this time. Jahangir’s inscription dates to 1605.
The pillar carries many inscriptions, the important ones being the
Pillar Edicts of Aśoka, the long praśasti (eulogy) on the Gupta
emperor Samudra Gupta, and one giving the genealogy of the
Mughal emperor Jahangir. Whether or not Samudra Gupta knew
the contents of the Pillar Edicts, no reference is made to them.
His own accomplishments—of conquest through wars—were
precisely what Aśoka had condemned. Jahangir certainly had no
knowledge of the contents of the earlier inscriptions. Yet the pillar
80 The Past Before Us
in each case was recognized as a statement of history to which a
ruler added his own statement, and through this historical function
claimed further legitimacy. So the pillar was an object of power
and demanded secular respect. It was an act of inheriting and
translating the past, as is also evident from the frequent re-use of
Aśokan pillars during the Sultanate.38 Some of these pillars,
located at Fatehabad probably by Firuz Tughluq, carry inscriptions
on the history of the Tughluq dynasty, which makes the point.
u
From the early second millennium ad there are narratives in the
regional languages pertaining to historical events.39 These incor-
porated genealogies, succession lists, and references to events.
They were written in various languages of northern India, such as
Old Gujarati, Marathi, Dingal, and Oriya. Such texts were, until
recently, largely ignored by historians concerned with historio-
graphy because they were not written in Sanskrit, or for that matter
in Persian or Turkish.
The poem Kanhadade Prabandha in Old Gujarati, with the im-
print of a Jaina style and composed by a brāhmaṇa called Padma-
nābha, focuses on the resistance of the Cauhānas of Jalor to
Ala-ud-din Khilji, an event of 1310. (A comparison has been made
between this and the chansons de geste of medieval France.40)
Material of a similar sort in Marathi took the shape of kaiphiyatas
and bhakhars, from the fifteenth century collected in the west-
ern Deccan and inspired by ballads on Shivaji and the Maratha
chieftains.41 The most widely quoted composition in this genre
from Rajasthan was the khyāt, composed in Dingal, by Nainsi,
and dates to the seventeenth century. The Mahārāṣṭra Purāṇa, in
38 F.B. Flood, “Pillars, Palimpsests and Princely Practices”, 95–116.
39 J.P. de Souza and C.M. Kulkarni (eds), Historiography in Indian Languages;
R. Aquil and P. Chatterjee (eds), History in the Vernacular.
40 I.M.P. Raeside, “A Gujarati Bardic Poem: The Kanhadade Prabandha”;
V.S. Bhatnagar (trans.), Padmanābha’s Kanhadade Prabandha: India’s Greatest
Patriotic Saga of Medieval Times.
41 N.K. Wagle, “Heroes in the Charitra-bhakhar, Povada and Akhyana of
Seventeenth and Eighteenth Century Maharashtra”, 219–36.
Towards Historical Traditions 81
Bengali, refers to Maratha incursions into Bengal in the eight-
eenth century.42 This harks back to the style of the Purāṇas but is
more closely concerned with a narrative of contemporary events.
Chronicles and temple records from Orissa, such as the Mādalā
Pañjī, refer to historical events.43 These texts were written parallel
to the court chronicles of the various sultanates and a comparative
study might prove instructive.
These were compositions that drew in part from earlier tradi-
tions with their multiple sources: the records of the bards and
genealogists—the bhaṭ and chāran—as well as the court records
of the scribes. Added to this were doubtless the narratives recorded
at the courts of the Sultans and the Mughals in Persian and Turk-
ish, whose authors were familiar with Arabic and Persian hist-
ories from further west. These texts of the later half of the second
mill ennium drew together many strands of what they themselves
probably saw as histories of families of status, dynasties, and
significant events.
But in the nineteenth century, in some places, the style was be-
ginning to change under the influence of Mughal historiography
and colonial writing.44 Mritunjaya Vidyalankar’s Rājabali, written
in 1808, is a narrative of the history of Delhi and Bengal. Time
is measured in tithis and space is viewed as that of Jambudvīpa
and Bhāratavarṣa. The somewhat summary narrative starts with
the Mahābhārata and continues to the Mughals. Akbar is prais-
ed and Aurangzeb carries the contradiction of being both a
destroyer and a patron of temples. An oblique reference is made
to the Rājataraṅgiṇī, perhaps because it was being discussed in
Orientalist circles. The stamp of Islamic historiography comes
in the statement that all rulers are appointed by Divine Will.
Later in time, the model of colonial writing becomes apparent in
the Bhāratabarṣer Itihāsa of Taranicharan Chattopadhyaya, writ-
ten in 1878, and in the writings of Bholanath Chakravarti. The
latter explains that Hindu society was corrupt and decadent
owing to long years of Muslim rule. The coming of Yavana rule
42 E.C. Dimock and P.C. Gupta (eds), The Mahārāṣṭra Purāṇa.
43 H. Kulke, Kings and Cults: State Formation and Legitimation in India and
South Asia.
44 P. Chatterjee, The Nation and Its Fragments, 75ff., 95ff.
82 The Past Before Us
termi znated the decadence. This was precisely the line given by
Eliot and Dowson in their History of India as Told by Its Own
Historians.45
The break with the indigenous tradition is more evident with
the introduction of European concepts of historiography. With the
assumption that there was no historical tradition, let alone infor-
mation on the past, a structure of historical narrative was seen as
necessary. The narrative now begins to describe a different plane
of being from what had existed before.
6. Summing Up
I should like to attempt defining historical consciousness as dif-
fering from historical traditions and these from historical writing,
especially as these terms will recur often. All three make a dis-
tinction between a believed past and the present. In the first case
it may not be sharply articulated, but it is indicated. My example
would be what I have called embedded histories, or more evidently
the inscriptions on the pillar of Aśoka at Allahabad. Historical
traditions by contrast are not just aware of a believed past but
have some understanding of the uses of a past, and these are then
employed in texts that draw on the functions of the past. The three
traditions that I referred to—the itihāsa-purāṇa, the Sramanic,
and the bardic—do precisely that. The elision from a historical
tradition to historical writing is an unflustered change, not always
recognized right away. Historical writing of pre-modern times is
sometimes articulated in new literary genres (as in early India),
whose prime purpose is to present persons and events in a manner
that pertains to the present but may be useful in the future, even if
the data draw upon the past. Methodological tests may be applied
to historical writing, but with the proviso that the demands we
make on historical writing today were not known in those times.
Some contextual judgement is a prerequisite.
I shall be arguing that there is a historical consciousness in
societies which is expressed in the manner in which they perceive
45 H.M. Elliot, The History of India as Told by Its Own Historians, vol. I,
Preface.
Towards Historical Traditions 83
and wish to present their pasts. Where this becomes an important
part of identity and legitimacy, and is represented as such, with
claims of recalling the past, it can take the form of historical
traditions. These have to be assessed in terms of their agenda,
their use of historical evidence as available to them, and whether
the ensuing narrative follows a systematic argument. Where
these requirements are met and the texts written as history, they
constitute historical writing. Historical consciousness, therefore,
is an underlying feature of all societies. Historical traditions may
be constituted from this and may initially take embedded forms.
Such is the case with poems about heroes, and with epics, and
with patterns of the past stitched into ritual texts. By contrast, in
Buddhist and Jaina historiographies, prominence is given to events
connected with monastic Elders and the history of the Saṅgha,
and, by correlating these with the history of rulers and persons
of authority, history becomes a powerful statement of a different
kind of tradition. The same would hold for the post-Gupta texts
that pertain to historical writing, such as the inscriptions, the carita
literature, and the vaṃśāvalīs.
This study is not an exercise in mentalités. Nor is it an attempt
to reinstate an indigenous interpretation of early Indian history,
or to argue that there is an “authentic” version of Indian history
in such sources. That kind of enterprise would be neither possible
nor worthwhile. It is not my intention to claim that my analysis
reflects what the authors of the texts were stating. I am searching
for and highlighting those facets in the texts that could represent
the ways in which the authors were commenting on what they
believed was the past, and on its interface with the period when
the texts were composed. In the embedded tradition the narrative
was updated more than once through interpolations. When genres
of distinctive historical writing emerged, updating and changing
was no longer necessary. Since the texts were not associated with
the sacred, other texts could be written if so required to confirm
or contradict the earlier ones.
Nevertheless, an awareness of the perceptions which earlier auth-
ors had of the past does seem to be necessary for unders tanding
early society and culture, and possibly even for the comprehen-
sion of “the Indian reality” in early times. To the extent that a
84 The Past Before Us
historical tradition is a search for and a record of identities, there
can be more than one such tradition. The juxtaposition of such
traditions and their priorities carries its own message. In the
hierarchy of hegemonic discourses, their ranking would vary in
time and place.
A historical tradition places events in a chronological frame-
work, although the chronology may not carry dates; it is conscious
of past events which are relevant to the society; and these events
are recorded in a form which meets the requirements of that soci-
ety. The form is based on its intellectual and social assumptions—
these include the social purpose of the record and the ideological
concerns of the society with reference to its understanding of the
past. And it is not devoid of some excusable element of fantasy
about the past.
My discussion of the texts in this book is from a single dimen-
sion: the role of such texts in creating a historical tradition. The
central focus is on historical consciousness and changing forms
within a society’s perceptions of the past. In this sense, my study
is limited. It is not an attempt to discuss every major text of a
historical tradition, but only to consider a few representative ex-
amples. The attempt is to see the earlier traditions as coherent; as
possessing some continuities despite changing forms; to analyse
some of their constituent forms; to perceive their relation with the
society from which they emerged; and to recognize the nature of
historical consciousness articulated in multiple ways—which, in
any society, is meaningful to the understanding of social culture.
The search is for the past looking at its present. The points at
which this is viewed become the lineages of their present, linked
to nodules of the past, created and reformulated momentarily or
over a span of time.
PART II
The Embedded Tradition

3
Fragmentary Narratives
from the Vedas
1. The Vedic Corpus
The Vedic corpus is so far the earliest body of texts from the
Indian past. Much of it was initially transmitted orally and
later in a written form. It can be viewed as the point of
commencement of the itihāsa-purāṇa traditions, initiating forms
that eventually became germinal to these traditions. Among
them, mention is made of the dāna-stuti hymns, included in the
earliest of the Vedas, the Ṛgveda; and, subsequently, of gāthās
and nārāśaṃsīs, all poems in praise of heroes; and ākhyānas,
narratives that are associated with itihāsa. This in itself may not
have been the commencement: the Ṛgveda may have incorporated
some themes from the oral tradition going back to earlier times,
and reflecting some integration with other prior cultures. Until the
Harappan pictograms are deciphered we can, at best, assume only
a marginal continuity of earlier traditions in the Vedic corpus.
The problem in using these texts as historical sources is that the
area they cover is vast and their chronology uncertain. Spatiall y,
the area of languages related to Indo-Aryan would include north-
eastern Iran, northern Afghanistan, and north-western India.1 Sub-
sequently, there were migrations into the Ganges plain where, most
1 Unless otherwise stated, India in this book refers to the Indian subconti-
nent.
88 The Past Before Us
likely, the existing languages were not Indo-Aryan. The Harappan
cities date to about 2600–1700 bc. The Vedic corpus is subsequent
to this. The Ṛgveda is frequently dated to c. 1500 bc, although it
might even be later, given that its cognates in Old-Iranian and par-
allels from northern Syria date to about the fourteenth century bc.
The substantial presence of Indo-Aryan speakers in north-western
India is from this period, although some minimal contact may have
existed from the borderlands just prior to this.
Some archaeological cultures have been associated with the
period of the later Vedic compositions—such as the Painted Grey
Ware culture—overlapping with the Late Harappan at a few sites
in the Punjab;2 and with some Black-and-Red Ware cultures con-
temporary with a late phase of the Harappan in Gujarat. If some
elements of the earlier traditions had continued despite the decline
of the Harappan cities, they could have been incorporated into the
emergent cultures. The same would apply to whatever may have
been brought by Indo-Aryan-speaking migrants from the bor-
derlands. These fragments from the past could include aspects of
mythology and rituals, as well as observances based on astronomy;
as also some names of clans that might have survived, even if only
in memory. This does not mean that the Ṛgveda was contemporary
with the Harappan culture, but that logically, being post-Harappan,
it may include partial survivals from the believed past.
The chronology of the Vedas is difficult to sift, for not only were
the hymns composed over a long span of time, some fragments
could be later interpolations.3 Thus, even in the Ṛgveda, which is
earlier than the other three Vedas, sections of the first and last of its
ten maṇḍalas are dated later than the intervening ones. The verses,
although composed in the latter part of the second millennium bc,
were compiled and edited in various recensions in the early first
2 J.P. Joshi, “Interlocking of Late Harappan Culture and PGW Culture in
the Light of Recent Excavations”, 100ff.; R. Thapar, “Puranic Lineages and
Archaeological Cultures”, in idem, Ancient Indian Social History: Some Inter-
pretations, 249ff.
3 M. Witzel, “Tracing the Vedic Dialects”; idem, “Substrate Languages in
Old Indo-Aryan (Rigvedic, Middle and Late Vedic)”; G. Erdosy (ed.), The Indo-
Aryans of Ancient South Asia: Language, Material Culture, Ethnicity; J.F. Staal,
Discovering the Vedas: Origins, Mantras, Rituals, Insights.
Fragmentary Narratives from the Vedas 89
millennium bc, as was the one of Śākalya, now commonly used.4
These recensions of the Ṛgveda could perhaps have been contem-
porary with the earlier sections of the later Vedas—the Sāma and
Yajur Vedas, constituting the triveda, to which the Atharvaveda was
then added. The Vedas came to be accepted as divinely revealed.5
They were probably codified when their oral reproduction needed
to be systematized. Regardless of their chronological uncertainty,
what is important is that the process of compiling and editing them
suggests the existence of a perspective on the past.
The corpus was edited with reference to people of diverse ori-
gins. Since there were earlier settlements of non-Aryan-speaking
peoples, whose presence is recorded through non-Aryan lingu-
istic elements in Vedic Sanskrit, and from earlier archaeological
sites, the societies reflected in the Vedic corpus were not cultur-
ally homogeneous, as is often assumed.6 A multilingual situation,
with the mixing of speakers of more than one language, resulted
in linguistic mingling, also reflected in part by mention of many
teachers and editors of the Vedic compositions in the Nirukta and
the Pratiśākhyas—the early grammars and etymologies.
Each of the four Vedas was identified by a school determined
by its editor, and by a set of texts:
• Saṃhitās, hymns associated with each Veda
•• Brāhmaṇas, largely exegeses on rituals
•• Āraṇyakas and Upaniṣads, philosophical texts on matters
arising from the Vedas, and from more general concerns of
philosophical thinking
•• Śrauta-sūtras, concerned with the performing of public ritu-
als, such as the important yajñas (sacrifices)
4 M.M. Deshpande, “Genesis of Ṛgvedic Retroflexion: A Historical and
Sociolinguistic Investigation”; Nirukta of Yāska, 9–23; Aṣṭādhyāyī of Pāṇini,
1.1.16, 4.3.106, 4.3.110.
5 J. Gonda, Vedic Literature, 9.
6 T. Burrow, The Sanskrit Language; F.B.J. Kuiper, Aryans in the Ṛgveda;
R. Thapar, “Society in Ancient India: The Formative Period”, in Cultural
Pasts, 336ff; idem, “The Archaeological Background to the Agnicāyana”, in
F. Staal (ed.), Agni, vol. II, 1–40; R. Thapar, “The Ṛgveda: Encapsulating Social
Change”, in K.N. Panikkar, et al., The Making of History, 11–40, included in
R. Thapar, The Aryan: Recasting Constructs.
90 The Past Before Us
Table I
Texts of the Vedic Corpus Referred to in this Chapter
(based on F. Staal, Discovering the Vedas, 80–1)
Veda Saṃhitā Brāhmaṇa Upaniṣad Śrauta Sūtra
Ṛgveda
Ṛk Aitareya Āśvalāyana
Kauśītaki Śāṇkhāyana
Yajurveda
(Kṛṣṇa) Taittirīya Taittirīya Baudhāyana
Āpastamba
Kāṭhaka Kaṭha
Maitrāyaṇi
(Śukla) Vājasaneyī Śatapatha Bṛhadāraṇyaka Kātyāyana
Sāmaveda
Pañcaviṃśa Chāndogya Lāṭyāyana
Sāma Jaiminīya Jaiminīya-
Upaniṣad-
Brāhmaṇa
Atharvaveda
Atharva Gopatha
The Vedic corpus was substantially manuals of ritual, and of ex-
egeses on these. The Brāhmaṇas and the Śrautasūtras, for instance,
composed later than the saṃhitās, were more appropriate for
priestly recitation and chanting, referred to as chandas. Other as-
sociated texts were the Grihyasūtras, concerned with the domestic
rituals of the individual’s life-cycle; and the Dharmasūtras, which
focused on the ordering of society through codes of duties and ob-
ligations. The dāna-stuti hymns, gāthās, nārāśaṃsīs, and ākhyānas
are just a small part of this vast compendium of ritual texts, but
the fact that they are included points to their significance.
In the process of stabilizing the corpus a prominent linguistic
feature was the separation of the liturgical language/s from the
popular language. This was, not overtly but in effect, literate elites
acquiring and maintaining a certain kind of social control. That
Fragmentary Narratives from the Vedas 91
there were already problems in comprehending the language of the
liturgical compositions in the early half of the first millennium bc
is evident from the need for etymological and explanatory texts,
such as the Nighantus, the Nirukta of Yāska, and the explanation
of narratives—as in the Bṛhad-devatā. The increasing distance of
the liturgical from popular usage was reiterated in Pāṇini’s fourth-
century bc grammar of classical Sanskrit, where he distinguishes
between the more commonly used language, the grammar of
which he systematized and which he calls bhāṣā, as distinct from
the more liturgical language of chandas.
The transmission of these compositions, seen essentially as
ritual requirements, became the special preserve of the brāhmaṇas.
For long periods, the compositions were memorized orally. A
complex set of mnemonic devices was (and are still) used to en-
sure the correct articulation of each syllable, since the power of
sound was fundamental to the efficacy of the formulae. There is,
however, a debate as to whether or not these devices presumed
literacy.7 The earliest evidence of an indigenous script dates to
the third century bc with the use of both kharoṣṭhī and brāhmī in
the edicts of Aśoka. The scripts are likely to have emerged just
prior to this.8
Because of the power believed to lie in the recitation of these
hymns, their availability was restricted. There was in theory a
careful check maintained on who could legitimately be included
among the priests, the criteria being birth and the use of Indo-
Aryan speech. However, there were exceptions. References are
made to brāhmaṇas born of women of low status or alien, as,
for example, the dāsyaḥ-putraḥ brāhmaṇas. The revered ṛṣi
Dīrghatamas Māmateya of the Ṛgveda is said in the later texts to
have married a dāsī by whom he had a son, the well-known poet
Kakṣīvant. A frequently narrated story refers to the two sons of
the ṛṣi Kaṇva, one of whom is said to have been of a śūdra mother
and who walks unhurt through a fire to prove the quality of his
7 J.F. Staal, Nambudri Vedic Recitation; R.T. Oliver, Communication and Cul-
ture in Ancient India and China; L. Renou, The Destiny of the Veda; P. Kiparsky,
“Oral Poetry: Some Linguistic and Typographical Considerations”.
8 Brāhmī graffiti on potsherds from recent excavations at Anuradhapura in
Sri Lanka have been dated to the fifth century bc, but the date and the nature of
the evidence are still being debated.
92 The Past Before Us
birth.9 This would be expected in a situation of the commingling
of people, and doubtless it acted as an entry point for cultural
notions and practices from local sources. Thus, it seems feasible
to suggest that the oral traditions of earlier times and of other
peoples would have gradually found their way into the immense
corpus of Vedic compositions.10
All oral sources do not constitute oral history. In order to qualify,
the material must reveal an attempt to transmit an awareness of
some common historical consciousness.11 Because the Vedas
were ritual texts, their preservation and transmission entailed
what might be called a closed oral tradition, where, in theory at
least, few interpolations could be admitted. This, it was thought,
could be ensured by careful mnemonic devices for memorizing
the hymns. This was a contrast to the open oral tradition of the
epics, where additions and changes were made, although not
readily admitted to.
2. The Authors and the Audience
Historical consciousness is articulated in two forms to be discussed
here. One is that of the dāna-stuti hymns in praise of heroes, which
are scattered in various parts of the Ṛgveda, although the largest
number is in the Eighth maṇḍala, associated with the Kaṇva fam-
ily of brāhmaṇas. The Kaṇvas in later texts were linked to the
Aṅgirasas who, together with the Bhṛgus, are regarded as keepers
of the narratives relating to past events. The late maṇḍalas of the
Ṛgveda—the First and Tenth—also have dāna-stutis, in some cases
looking back to the past. Such a looking back is more evident in
the later Vedic corpus, where rājās are said to have performed
sacrificial rituals in earlier times, and are upheld as exemplars,
such as Sudās Paijavana,12 also mentioned in the Ṛgveda.
9 E.g. Dīrghatamas in Ṛgveda, 1.147, 1.158; A.A. Macdonell and A.B. Keith,
Vedic Index, vol. I, 336; Aitareya Brāhmaṇa, 2.8.1; Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa,
14.6.6. See also Jaiminīya Brāhmaṇa, 3.233–5; W. Caland (ed.), Das Jaiminīya
Brāhmaṇa.
10 R. Thapar, From Lineage to State, 116ff.; D.D. Kosambi, An Introduction to
the Study of Indian History, 96ff.
11 D.P. Henige, Oral Historiography; B.A. Stolz and R.A. Shanon (eds), Oral
Literature and the Formulae.
12 Aitareya Brāhmaṇa, 8.21; Ṛgveda, 7.18.
Fragmentary Narratives from the Vedas 93
The ritual content of the Vedas made it inevitable that the
authors would be the priests who performed the rituals—the
brāhmaṇa śrotriya priests. Mention is made of kavis (poets),
a category that would probably have included brāhmaṇas and
bards. The brāhmaṇas were at this point a caste of ritual special-
ists and therefore provided paradigms embodying rules, norms,
status, and hierarchy which could either be observed, as by the
orthodoxy, or rejected, as by the heterodoxy.13 Ritual was, in turn,
locked into mantras which, with their emphasis on correctness
of sound, constituted a special kind of language.14 That the Vedic
tradition focused on ritual did not of course promise complete
authenticity, since ritual itself undergoes change. These were
compositions describing and explaining rituals, accompanied by
commentaries, all authored by families of priests: therefore their
worldview was limited. This was not literature reflecting a large
range of social concerns.
Editing and compiling would have involved sorting out author-
ship, and ascribing authorship either to individuals, which is
infrequent, or to families, which is more common. What led to
the arrangement of the compositions—doubtless accompanied by
diverse opinions on the matter—would have been another expe-
rience.15 Presumably, with each increase in the number of hymns
there would have developed a system of farming out the memor -
ization to families of priests, and including new paṭhas as mnemo-
nic devices.
Some distinction in authorship can be made between poets
and ritual specialists. In one hymn there is a personification of
raibhī, nārāśaṃsī, and gāthā.16 Also associated with these were
the songs of praise recited by kavis.17 Whereas in the Ṛgveda there
is some overlap between the functions of the priest and the poet,
13 Cf. J.F. Staal, “The Independence of Rationality from Literacy”, 301–10.
14 Ibid.; K.G. Ghurye, Preservation of Learned Tradition in India; C.G.
Kashikar, A Survey of Śrauta-sūtras.
15 There have been diverse opinions even in recent times. Among the more
representative views are those of L. Renou, Etudes Vediques et Paninéennes,
Paris, 1956–; and M. Witzel, “Substrate Languages in Old Indo-Aryan (Rigvedic,
Middle and Later Vedic)”.
16 Atharvaveda, 14.1.7; Ṛgveda, 10.85.6.
17 Ṛgveda, 10.114.5.
94 The Past Before Us
this was gradually bifurcated in the later corpus and the brāhmaṇa
grew distinct from the sūta, who was in some senses a successor
to the kavi.
Nevetheless, many poets are named, such as Babhru,18 Śyā -
v āśva,19 Nābhānediṣṭha,20 and Kakṣīvant. The last is also des-
cribed as a vipra, kavi, and stotṛ, and claims Nāhuṣa and the
Sindhu rājā Svanaya Bhāvya among his patrons.21 Referred to
often and reverentially, Kakṣīvant is both a presser of soma and a
eulogist.22 One hymn narrates the restoration of his youth—a com-
mon enough legend in many early literatures.23 Kakṣīvant Auśija
is a descendant of Uśij, a dāsī who is said to have been sent to his
father Dīrghatamas,24 this being another instance of a brāhmaṇa
born of a dāsī.
The narratives refer to the exploits of the rājās, justifying their
authority. At this early stage there may, on occasion, have been a
tension between the brāhmaṇa and the kṣatriya in their respective
claims to authority.25 The brāhmaṇa was the recipient of gifts—
tangible wealth—from the kṣatriya, and in return held out to the
donor the possibility of rewards, such as going to heaven, attaining
power, strength and territory, and controlling labour.26
Bards in the Ṛgveda were regarded as more than just profes-
sionals singing praises of the rājās.27 They are respected kavis—
tvam viprastvam kavi28—judged by the quality of their poems and
recitals. A comparison is made between the juice of the soma
plant being “decked” with milk in the same way as the rājās are
graced with eulogies.29 Stutis (praise) could therefore be fantasy,
but references to person and event reduced the fantasy. Eulogies
18 Ṛgveda, 5.30, 8.22.10; Atharvaveda, 4.29.21.
19 Ṛgveda, 5.52–61, 8.35.38, 9.32, 8.2.40; Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa, 13.7.12.
20 Ṛgveda, 10.62.
21 Ṛgveda, 4.26.1, 10.143.1, 1.116.10, 117.13, 118.6, 112.11, 1.126, 4.26.1.
22 Ṛgveda, 1.18.1, 1.112.11.
23 Ṛgveda, 10.143.1.
24 Ṛgveda, 1.18.1.; Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa, 14.11.16; Bṛhad-devatā, 4.21ff.
25 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 4.1.4.1–6.
26 Aitareya Brāhmaṇa, 8.40.2.
27 9.18.2.
28 Ṛgveda, 1.177.5, 1.178.3, 3.33.8, 3.39.7, 5.33.7; Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 12.1.5.1,
12.4.3.5.
29 Ṛgveda, 9.10.3.
Fragmentary Narratives from the Vedas 95
on Indra, victorious over the dasyu, represent the deity as hero.30
Their compositions bring them wealth and the rājās are exhorted
to give generously to the bards.31 The adhvaryu priest is required
to direct singers who sing in praise of the yajamāna and the rājās
of earlier times.32
Among those who compose eulogies, mention is made of the
Bhṛgus. The Bhṛgu and the Aṅgirasa are sometimes referred to
jointly in the phrase Bhṛgvāṅgirasa. As a distinct category of
priests they are associated with the Atharvaveda and the worship of
Agni.33 It is significant that, in one text, it is explicitly stated that
the hotṛ for the rājasūya should be a Bhṛgu; the hotṛ is required
to recite the pāriplava narratives referring to the past, and these
include the ākhyānas.34 Were the Bhṛgus the repository, as it were,
of these narratives? They are connected with the yatis, whom Indra
disliked, and yet they were priests of the Druhyus.35 The Druhyus
were opposed to the Tṛtsu and Bharata.36 This suggests local
political confrontations. Bhṛgus are also said to be the keepers of
narratives relating to the itihāsa-purāṇa tradition despite being
associated with the unorthodox—the yātudhānas and the vrātya.
This situation seems likely to have encouraged many strands in
the tradition. Is this a hint that part of the tradition came from
non-Vedic sources?
It has been suggested that some priests of the dāsas were ad-
opted by the Indo-Aryan speakers.37 Among these were the Bhṛgus
and the Aṅgirasas. They were exempted from the usual rules of
marriage for they often married kṣatriya wives,38 thus introducing
a category that came to be called brahma-kṣatra, a combination of
brāhmaṇa and kṣatriya. This notion may not have been altogether
30 Ṛgveda, 3.34.5–6, 5.33.7.
31 Ṛgveda, 5.10.3, 6.3.7.
32 Śāṅkhāyana Śrautasūtra, 16.1.25; Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 13.4.3.3.
33 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 1.2.1.13.
34 Śāṅkhāyana Śrautasūtra, 15.12.2, 16.1.22.
35 Ṛgveda, 8.3.9, 6.18.
36 Ṛgveda, 7.8.4, 7.18.
37 D.D. Kosambi, “On the Origin of Brahmana Gotras”, 98–166; R.K. Chau-
dhury, Vratyas in Ancient India, 24.
38 D.D. Kosambi, “On the Origin of Brahmana Gotras”; J. Brough, The Early
Brahmanical System of Gotra and Pravara, 4; R.P. Goldman, Gods, Priests and
Warriors.
96 The Past Before Us
unconnected with rights over clan resources and associated author-
ity. They are said to have been the priests of the enemies of the
gods—the daityas, dānavas and asuras—to begin with, and later
ministered to those on the side of the devas (the gods).
The Aṅgirasa and Atharvan priests are associated with the
Atharva veda, viewed as somewhat different from the other three
Vedas,39 and are in later texts referred to as Atharvāṅgirasaḥ. The
endorsement in the Atharvaveda of yātu and abhicāra (sorcery),
as well as bheṣaja (healing), hints at its origins as a manual for
shamans. There is a telling statement on the relationship of the
Atharvāṅgirasaḥ to itihāsa-purāṇa when it is said, “atharvāṅgiras
eva madhu kritah iti purāṇam puṣpam . . .” (the atharvāṅgirasaḥ
draw out the honey from the flower that is the purāṇa).40 The refer-
ence here seems to be less to the text and more to the authors.
Even more striking is the implied association with sorcery of
both the Bhṛgus and the Aṅgirasas in references to yātudhāna.
The Atharvaveda is described as yātuvid,41 and the yātudhāna are
associated with the rākṣasas.42 The two are propitiated through
sacrifice.43 The derivation of rākṣasa is from *rakṣa (to guard).
One of the things that was being guarded initially may have been
a secret knowledge essential to sorcery, and those having this
knowledge could have been the rākṣasas.
The closeness of the Bhṛgu and the Aṅgirasa is further illus-
trated in variations on a myth of origin. The great god Prajāpati
performed a sacrificial ritual in the presence of Varuṇa. On be-
holding the goddess of speech, Vāc, the semen of the two gods fell
on the fire. From the flames arose Bhṛgu, and from the embers
Aṅgirasa.44 This myth may have been a later invention, although
both the fire and soma cults are common to the Avesta and the
39 A.B. Keith, Religion and Philosophy of the Vedas and Upanisads, 223–6;
A.A. Macdonell and A.B. Keith, Vedic Index, vol. I, 18.
40 Chāndogya Upaniṣad, 3.4.1
41 A.A. Macdonell and A.B. Keith, Vedic Index, vol. II, 190.
42 Ṛgveda, 10.87, 10.182, 7.104.1; A.B. Keith, Religion and Philosophy of the
Vedas and Upanisads, 237–8.
43 Taittirīya Brāhmaṇa, 3.4.1.5.
44 Bṛhad-devatā, 5.97–101; cf. Aitareya Brāhmaṇa, 3.34.1; Nirukta of Yāska,
3.17.
Fragmentary Narratives from the Vedas 97
Ṛgveda.45 Was one of the claims to ascendancy of the Bhṛgu-
Aṅgirasa derived from a believed tradition of knowledge from
earlier times? Whatever the case, the association with magic,
whether beneficial or hostile, remains dominant.46 Thus it is
mentioned that the Aṅgirasa who was oppressed by the kṣatriyas
ruined his oppressors.47
The migration of some clans eastwards to the middle Ganges
plain seems to have led to the induction of local bards and poets,
referred to as the sūta and the māgadha, and yet another group
known as the vrātyas whose identity, despite speculation, remains
enigmatic. But they seem to have some links, however tenuous,
with the Bhṛgvāṅgirasas. The term is generally explained as de-
riving from the root *vrata, to wander, as they roamed around in
bands,48 a tendency which has led to them also being described as
renouncers. The yati is sometimes associated with the vrātyas.49
If this association is valid, then the yatis may also be linked to the
Bhṛgvāṅgirasa.50 The vrātyas are said to speak the language of
the consecrated, although they are unconsecrated themselves and
require a vrātyastoma ritual in order to be made ritually accept-
able. The ability to pick up the speech of the Indo-Aryan speakers
was crucial.51 Their having to adapt to Indo-Aryan may suggest
they were people from the east, from Magadha and Aṅga, and
therefore initially unfamiliar with the speech of those from the
Ganga–Yamuna Doab.
45 Ṛgveda 5.11.6.
46 A.B. Keith, History and Philosophy of the Vedas and Upanisads, 224–5;
A.A. Macdonell and A.B. Keith, Vedic Index, vol. I, 11.
47 Of the Aṅgirasas mentioned in the Vedic corpus, perhaps the most intrigu-
ing is the reference to Kṛṣṇa. Ghora Aṅgirasa is said to have communicated
the knowledge of the Upaniṣads to Kṛṣṇa, the son of Devakī, and he is said
never to have thirsted after knowledge again. Chāndogya Upaniṣad, 3.17.6. A
Kṛṣṇa, son of Devakī, was to play a major role as the incarnation of Viṣṇu in
subsequent times.
48 This is emphasized in the later meaning of the word, as in the Aṣṭādhyāyī
of Pāṇini, 5.2.25. See also Mahābhārata, Sabhāparvan, 13.55.
49 R.K. Chaudhury, Vratyas in Ancient India, 56.
50 Ṛgveda, 10.72.7, 8.6.18.
51 N.N. Ghose, Indo-Aryan Literature and Culture, 6ff.; adikṣita-dikṣitavācam-
vadanti-aduruktvākyam-duruktamahuḥ, in Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa, 17.1.9.
98 The Past Before Us
It would thus seem that there were people who, although re-
garded as mleccha or outside the pale by the brāhmaṇas, were of
some consequence. It is just possible that they were the shamans
and priests of the earlier culture, and that their claims to power
led to their continuation as practitioners of rituals within the Vedic
system, thereby also introducing changes in Vedic belief and ritual.
A major concession was the inclusion of the book of the Vrātyas
in the Atharvaveda (Book XV).
Mention is made of the itihāsa and the purāṇa, the gāthās and
the nārāśaṁsīs, in association with the vrātyas.52 Did such groups
then bring their own narratives, introducing their own past? And
were these incorporated into the ākhyānas of the Vedic corpus so
as to appeal to a larger audience at the time of the sacrificial ritual?
Such narratives would act as a bridge between the earlier people
and those migrating into the area. Yet the Atharvaveda was also
associated with the Bhṛgvāṅgirasa. The vrātya tradition appears to
have been an independent tradition which was gradually, although
perhaps unwillingly at first, included in the Vedic corpus.
The Dharmaśāstras, composed later, came to use the word vrātya
to refer to groups which had failed to perform their prescribed
social and ritual duties. They were therefore thought degenerate,
and brāhmaṇas were advised to dissociate from them.53
Even more directly linked as authors to the seminal histori-
cal traditions were the sūta and māgadha, mentioned only in the
later Vedic corpus. The māgadhas belonged to Magadha (south
Bihar), a land regarded as alien and impure.54 There is a connec-
tion with the vrātyas since the brahmabandhus, inferior brāhma-
ṇas of Magadha, are recipients of a dakṣinā in the form of items
belonging to vrātyas.55 Brahmabandhus were those claiming to be
brāhmaṇas but not trained as such, and the same definition was
sometimes used for the vrātya.56
52 Atharvaveda, 15.6.4.
53 Manu’s Code of Law, 10.20–3, 11.63; Patañjali’s Vyākaraṇa-Mahābhāṣya,
5.2.21.
54 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 1.4.1.14ff. The land had to be purified by Agni before
it could be settled.
55 Lāṭyāyana Śrauta Sūtra, 8.6.28; Kātyāyana Śrauta Sūtra, 22.4.1ff. and
24.
56 Pañcaviṃṣa Brāhmaṇa, 17.1.2; Chāndogya Upaniṣad, 6.1.1.
Fragmentary Narratives from the Vedas 99
Of the two, the sūta had a somewhat better standing, and the
word came to be used for a bard. He was not only a bard but
one who had a connection with the rājā as his charioteer—the
chariot was a symbol of status, apart from being military equip-
ment. This proximity allowed him to narrate the exploits of the
rājā. He is mentioned together with the grāmaṇi—the head of
the village—and is listed among the eight vīras (heroes) and the
eleven ratnins (jewels) who were important to the rājā in the ritual
of the rājasūya (consecration).57 The sūta is referred to as rājakṛt,
literally a maker of the rājā, presumably through his eulogies on
his patron.
The origin of the word sūta remains unclear. Linked to the root
*su, it can either mean to consecrate or to impel. The first meaning
links it to the recitation by the sūta of the gāyatrī mantra, which
was intended to give energy to the rājā.58 The word has also been
explained as denoting the one who preserved the śruta and stuti,
aspects of the tradition.59 It could also be argued that it had some
connection with sūtra, or thread, where the other function of the
sūta, which was to keep the genealogies of the rājā, may have
been seen as maintaining the thread which ran through succes-
sion.60 Presumably it was in this capacity, as the genealogist of
the rājā and therefore his legitimizer, that he was also regarded
as inviolable.61
It has been suggested that sūtas were drawn from the Bhṛg-
vāṅgirasa families, but this plausible suggestion lacks definitive
evidence.62 The sūtas, moreover, are not associated with brahmani-
cal training. In subsequent centuries their status is lower, as also
that of the māgadha, until in the Dharmaśāstra of Manu, written
at the start of the first millennium ad, the sūta comes to refer only
to the profession of the charioteer, or to those associated with the
keepers of animals.63 This thus has a bearing on who controlled
the historical tradition once it came to be more clearly constructed.
57 A.A. Macdonell and A.B. Keith, Vedic Index, vol. II, 462–3.
58 Kāṭhaka Saṃhitā, 28.3.
59 F.E. Pargiter, Ancient Indian Historical Tradition, 15.
60 R. Thapar, From Lineage to State, 137.
61 Taittirīya Saṃhitā, 4.5.2.1: namaḥ sūtāyāhantyāya.
62 V.S. Pathak, Ancient Historians of India, 4, 15ff.
63 Manu’s Code of Law, 10.11, 17, 26, 47.
100 The Past Before Us
There is certainly a contradiction between the status of this group
as given in the later Dharmaśāstras and that recorded in earlier
traditions. Yet the narratives in the Purāṇas are often attributed to
sūtas, and they are central to the epics as well. The sūtas were to
take up other professions as soldiers, physicians, keepers of horses,
and elephants. The māgadhas, by comparison, decline.
As regards the audience, the poem in praise of the rājā would
have been recited at two kinds of gatherings. One was the occa-
sion when the yajña was performed, when the clan would have
gathered, the poem being part of the larger recitation linked to the
ritual. The other would have been a smaller gathering, perhaps
intended only for the chief and his kinsmen. In either case the
audience would have comprised other poets and the clan. Such
hero-lauds were also intended to be heard by later generations,
hence their location in ritual texts.
The authors of the fragmentary references to past and con-
temporary rājās seem to have been people who were keepers of
a tradition that was distinct from the rituals, even if the tradition
was incorporated into ritual texts. They came from groups such
as the Kaṇvas, Bhṛgus, Aṅgirasas, and sūtas, that initially had a
marginal status but who nevertheless worked their way into the
mainstream. It is possible that the compositions they controlled,
which were historical in nature, came to be seen as a potentially
valuable component of power, but not with the same value as
ritual. This may possibly explain why the itihāsa-purāṇa is re-
ferred to as the Fifth Veda.
3. The Social Universe of the Vedic Corpus
Events and relations of power are embedded in the Vedic corpus,
but they have to be teased out. Such teasing out requires some
familiarity with the kind of society and politics it encapsulates.
The Vedic corpus illustrates a clan society (as defined in Chap -
ter 2), although there is within it a mutation from the relatively
more egalitarian system of the Ṛgveda to a more hierarchical sys-
tem of the later Vedas. Eventually, as noted, this was to evolve into
kingship and the creation of states from the mid-first millennium
bc in post-Vedic times. Since the remembrance of past heroes
and events is referred to, it might be useful to keep in mind the
historical context of these societies. Some further familiarity with
Fragmentary Narratives from the Vedas 101
the historical background at this point will also be useful in draw-
ing out elements of historical consciousness from the texts.
The Ṛgveda describes cattle-herding agro-pastoralists, whose
geographical horizon was the north-west of the subcontinent.
The wider horizon was narrowed down to the land between the
Sindhu/Indus and the “two grassy banks of the river Sarasvatī”.64
The latter has been identified by some scholars with the Haraxvati
to the west and by others with the Hakra to the east of the Indus,
or in that vicinity. Some clans migrated eastwards to settle in the
Ganga–Yamuna Doab, perhaps because of hydrological changes
in the former region.65 This transition also resulted in greater
agricultural activity, which gradually superseded pastoralism.
This would have meant settling in areas which, judging from
the archaeological evidence, were in some cases inhabited by an
existing sedentary population familiar with agriculture. Seasonal
sacrifices point to increasing agricultural activities. A settlement
required clearing forested areas, which involve encroaching into
the hunting grounds, if not the habitat of existing forest-dwellers.
Relations between the various communities involved in such ac-
tivities changed. The difference between the grāma (settlement)
and araṇya (wilderness) is sharply demarcated. The dichotomies,
therefore, were not just between earlier inhabitants and newcom-
ers, but also between the diverse existing societies.
The clan society of the Ṛgveda is different from the urban
cultures that came before and after—the Harappan cities prior
to it and the subsequent kingdoms of the mid-first millen -
nium bc. The unit of society, the viś (clan) was located in small
localized settlements. A group of clans formed the jana, sometimes
translated as “tribe”, although it might be better understood as
“a constituent of a segmentary society”. Identity came from the
clan one was born into. The mainstay of clan wealth was cattle,
alongside horse livestock.66 The horse’s speed made it essential to
fast transportation and therefore more valuable than other animals.
Increases in wealth required proficiency in herding, involving
proximity to pasturelands and water resources. Controlling access
64 Ṛgveda, 7.96.1–2.
65 M.R. Mughal, Ancient Cholistan; R. Thapar, From Lineage to State, 21.
66 Horses of quality, however, have never been successfully bred in India and
have generally been imported from Central Asia and Arabia.
102 The Past Before Us
to these led to skirmishes. When they proved difficult to come by,
cattle-raiding became the simpler way out. Cattle raids and the
ensuing violence were almost endemic to pastoral communities.
Each clan saw itself as a potential node of power and was vying
for authority until such time as it fell by the wayside. Since the
focus of authority could shift and the pastoral system required a
balance between the clans, raiding was a way of preventing the
concentration of power and the accumulation of wealth in one clan.
Nevertheless, this could not be avoided and some clans emerged
as more powerful and wealthy, and their clansmen became the
heroes of the epic poems. The person who protected the resources
or led the raid was crucial to the clan, and this was in most cases
the chief, the rājā/rājan.
A more peaceful access to resources comes about at times when
the relationship between pastoralists and cultivators is symbiotic
instead of combative. In this, pastoralists follow a defined circuit
whereby they move their herds to fields recently harvested. The
animals feed on the stubble and their droppings manure the fields.
This is not a relationship described in the hymns, but it seems to
have been frequently practised. It is a plausible hypothesis that
if the cultivators spoke a language different from that of the pas-
toralists, then some degree of bilingualism may have emerged;
and this may have been one factor accounting for non-Indo-Aryan
elements in the language of the Vedic corpus.67 Given the occur-
rence of non-Aryan agricultural words in the Vedic corpus, it
could be suggested that the dāsas were the cultivators, with whom
eventually a symbiotic relationship emerged.68
If this body of clans was to be referred to conjointly, it is just
possible that the term used was pañca-janāḥ (the five peoples),
although its meaning remains something of an enigma. Some
have argued that these are the five tribes occasionally mentioned
together—the Pūrus, Anus, Druhyus, Turvaśas, and Yadus69—as
67 T. Burrow, The Sanskrit Language, 373ff.; F.B.J. Kuiper, Aryans in the
Ṛgveda.
68 R. Thapar, From Lineage to State, 34ff.; idem, “Society in Ancient India:
The Formative Period”, in Cultural Pasts, 310–35.
69 B.R. Sharma, “The Pañca-janas in the Vedas”, 244–64; M.V. Patvardhan,
“Pañcajana”, 169–82; Ṛgveda, 1.108.8, 7.18.14, 8.10.5.
Fragmentary Narratives from the Vedas 103
opposed to the Bharatas.70 In the Purāṇas, the five are described as
the sons of Yayāti, a connection which is not made in the Ṛgveda,
where Yayāti is referred to as a yajamāna (patron of the sacrifice)
from ancient times.71 Others have suggested that the five represent
the four varṇas and those outside the varṇa ordering; or various
categories of human and celestial beings; or the four fires of the
sacrificial ritual and that of the gṛhapati (head of the household).72
Since the number five is sometimes used to represent a spatial
totality—four quarters and the centre—by extension pañca-janāḥ
may be idiomatic for all the clans.
Given the primacy of kinship, recording generations changed
from just mentioning individuals as fathers or sons to listing an
ancestor or two and a couple of descendants. Generations therefore
become time-markers. Depending on the context, such references
can be helpful in suggesting the chronology of the hymns.
The rājā/rājan was the title of a single person, although clans
with multiple rājās are mentioned in later sources that refer to
them more as governing families.73 The term is generally trans-
lated as “king”, but in the context of the Ṛgveda “chief” seems
more appropriate. Chiefships could last for a considerable time
before mutating into kingships. Sacrificial ceremonies, such as
the abhiṣeka, rājasūya, aśvamedha, and vājapeya, could well have
been the initiation and articulation of chiefly power: they need not
be seen only in terms of kingship. The context determines whether
the reference is to a chief or to a king. The constituents of the state
mentioned in the later texts—when states and kingdoms had come
to be established74—are not evident in these earlier compositions.
Elements of impending kingship probably date to a period closer
to the mid-first millennium bc.
The jana was the larger unit incorporating both the rājan/rājā
and his kinsmen, as well as the viś, and possibly more than one
clan. The rājā received offerings and prestations (bali) from the
70 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 13.5.4.14; Aitareya Brāhmaṇa, 8.23.
71 Ṛgveda, 10.63.
72 7.67ff.; Bṛhad-devatā, 7.51ff.; Nirukta of Yāska, 3.8.
73 As, for example, the many Cedi rājās mentioned in the Cetiya Jātaka,
no. 422, in The Jātaka.
74 Arthaśāstra, 6.1.1ff.
104 The Past Before Us
viś at the sacrificial ritual,75 and the produce of the viś was for the
clan and the rājā. The latter in turn acquired additional wealth
through cattle raids and predation, which was distributed at rituals
where the clan assembled, such as that of the vidatha. Cattle raids
were also a means of acquiring labour when herders were captured
along with their animals. The emergence of the rājā as protector
distinguishes between those under his protection, his prajā (liter-
ally: children), and those who were likely to be captured in a raid
and were therefore alien. The ability to retain the prajā came to be
crucial, because raids required a body of followers, as did claims
to land newly cleared and settled. The charisma of the chief drew
on rituals which, in part, acted as legitimizing devices. Eulogies
of the chief, providing exaggerated accounts of his exploits, as in
the hero-lauds, were always to his advantage.
A dual social division was that of the ārya and the dāsa. This
has been much debated, particularly in the context of the theory
of an Aryan race. From an overview of the evidence it can be sug-
gested that the distinction had less to do with skin colour and racial
type, despite occasional references to darkness in connection with
the dāsas, and more to do with differences in language, belief sys-
tems, and cultural norms.76 The term ārya is more frequently associat-
ed with status and used for a respected person, and implicitly
con nected with wealth and possessions.77 Incorrect use of the
Indo-Aryan language is one characteristic of the Other, although
not the only one. The emphasis when making the distinction seems
to be less on ethnicity and more on Otherness.
The dasyu, whom some take to be identical with the dāsas
(others distinguish between the two terms), are said to be amantur-
anyavrato-amānuṣah . . .; and elsewhere they are said to be adevam
and ayajyavan, the words suggesting differences in belief, worship,
deities, and human concerns.78 Deities, especially Indra and Agni,
help to destroy the dāsas. The cattle wealth of the dāsas is often
the reason for skirmishes. There is hostility towards the dāsas,
75 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 1.3.2.15.
76 R. Thapar, “The Ṛgveda: Encapsulating Social Change”, 11–40; see also
idem, The Aryan: Recasting Constructs, 121–60.
77 H.W. Bailey, “Iranian Arya and Daha”, 71ff.
78 Ṛgveda, 10.22.8, 9.105.6.
Fragmentary Narratives from the Vedas 105
but some powerful dāsa chiefs find respectable mention. Priests,
as recipients of gifts from clan chiefs, refer to the magnanimity
even of dāsa chiefs. The śūdra caste, the lowest and linked to the
notion of servility, possibly originated largely from their ranks.
Dāsa comes to connote a slave, and together with the śūdra later
became a distinctive functional category, outside the lineage sys-
tem, providing labour.
Another duality was between the ārya and the mleccha or
anārya.79 The latter was a broader group than the dāsas and in-
cluded those that did not speak the Aryan language, or who spoke
it incorrectly, or who did not observe custom as practised by Aryan
speakers.80 This duality was to have widespread geographical
ramifications with the rippling outwards of the Aryan language.
The term mleccha does not always connote contempt, because
sometimes it merely means one who is outside the social pale of
caste. Dāsa came to be used for those thought of as servile.
Vedic society was not egalitarian. The differentiation between
the rājā and the viś becomes sharper in the later Vedas. The dis-
tinctive roles of the chief and the ṛtvij (the ritual specialist) were
being accentuated. Kinship determined distance from labour
and wealth. Prestations were made at sacrificial rituals and the
distribution of these gifts involved larger shares for brāhmaṇas
and rājās. The rājā, selected as the representative of the clan,
was the repository of wealth, which was computed in cattle, hor-
ses, chariots, gold, and dāsīs. However, he was not encouraged to
accumulate wealth as a means of enhancing his power. The yajña
(sacrificial ritual) was the occasion for wealth to be periodically
displayed, consumed, and destroyed. Rituals that were meant
to facilitate the acquisition and consolidation of power actually
ensured that the acquired resources were exhausted from time to
time, preventing a concentration of authority among the ruling
clans. But this gradually changed. The retaining of resources and
power by the rājā encouraged the eventual emergence of kingship
and of the state.81
79 Ṛgveda, 7.5.3, 7.5.6, 4.16.3, 1.101.1, 10.22.8.
80 Ṛgveda, 3.53.14; Nirukta of Yāska, 6.32.
81 R. Thapar, “Sacrifice, Surplus and the Soul”, in idem, Cultural Pasts,
809–31.
106 The Past Before Us
Small settlements close to each other were replaced with a clus-
tering of settlements around larger centres in the middle Ganges
plain.82 This appears to have been accompanied by a rise in the
population. Rights over land—largely still rights of usage—are
held by the clan. Territory as a political unit of subsistence is no
longer unbounded but identified as that of the jana—the janapada:
literally, where the jana places its foot—and generally named after
the ruling clan, thus recognizing territory as a source of power.
The differentiation between kṣatriya and viś is evident in similes,
such as one which says the former eats the latter as the deer eats
grain.83 Indra is proclaimed as the prototypical kṣatriya and is said
to be the sovereign of all creation, the one who attacks the settle-
ments of the dāsas and the asuras and guards the law.84
The stratification of society is frequently referred to in terms
of varṇa, literally “colour”, but used symbolically to differentiate
between groups; the word is translated as caste in modern times.85
Of the four varṇas, the brāhmaṇas were most frequently identified
through gotras which were patrilineal, exogamous sibships whose
members traced their descent to a common eponymous ances-
tor.86 The kṣatriyas, from the root *kṣatr, pointed to power. They
claimed status on the basis of genealogical bonds and descent,
which comes to be represented in the notion of vaṃśa (succes-
sion; lineage) and confirmed by marriage alliances with families
claiming the correct status. Kṣatriya was the term which, in the
82 G. Erdosy, Urbanisation in Early Historical India.
83 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 3.3.2.8, 8.7.2.2, 9.4.3.5.
84 Aitareya Brāhmaṇa, 8.12.17.
85 The translation of varṇa as caste, although current today, raises the prob-
lem of the translation of jāti, used in some texts more frequently in the sense
of caste. A distinction can be made between varṇa and jāti, where the former
relates more to ritual status and the latter to actual socio-economic status and
occupation. There is no reference to jāti in the Ṛgveda, and sparse references
to it even in the later parts of the Vedic corpus. This is not altogether surprising
since the Vedas are essentially ritual texts, and therefore varṇa as ritual status
would be mentioned more frequently.
86 P.V. Kane, “Gotra and Pravara in Vedic Literature”, 1–17; D.D. Kosambi,
“Early Brahmins and Brahminism”, 87–97; idem, “On the Origin of the Brah-
mana Gotras”, 98–166; J. Brough, The Early Brahmanical System of Gotra and
Pravara. In the Dharmaśāstra texts gotras are said to be important for marriage
and for the worship of pitṛs (ancestors), i.e. for asserting identity of descent.
Fragmentary Narratives from the Vedas 107
later Vedic corpus, superseded the earlier rājan or rājanya used in
the Ṛgveda. The function of the kṣatriya as the warrior protecting
territory and people was gradually extended to governing both.
The initial separation between brāhmaṇa and kṣatriya, and the
subsequent interdependence of the two, is indicated in various
statements.87 The interdependence also leads to some tension in
the relationship.88 Eventually the two co-operate in subordinating
both the vaiśya and the śūdra.
The rājanya and the brāhmaṇa live off the vaiśya, whose oc-
cupations were cattle-raising, agriculture, and trade. The vaiśya,
from viś, could be oppressed by those in power by being pressed
into service or by being made to provide prestations.89
The exclusion of the śudra varṇa from the first three higher
varṇas is made clear in the later texts, the Dharmasūtras, even by
the fact that the śūdra cannot trace an ancestry through a gotra
or a vaṃśa (lineage). His ancestry is limited to his parents, who
are usually said to be of different castes; therefore he is of mixed
caste and this in itself lowers his status.
Such a system of stratification is in part a carry-over from a
lineage-based society. Interestingly, the specific hostility of Indra
to the dāsa and the frequent prayers to Indra in the Ṛgveda to
destroy the dāsa, are mentioned less frequently in the later Vedic
corpus. The social ordering of society had now acquired other
mechanisms of claiming status and creating subordinated groups.
The term dāsa continued to be used but the connotation seems to
shift from meaning “the Other”, to “one who has to be servile”.
Caste stratification was also made effective through ensuring
that regulations regarding marriage were observed. Rules of mar-
riage were also a form of control over women. Women provided
not only progeny but also labour, and patriarchal control was
seen as necessary on both counts.90 The functioning of caste was
dependent on this control.
87 The adhvaryu (priest) proclaims the yajamāna as rājā to the ratnins, fol-
lowed by the statement, somo’smākam brāhmaṇāh rājā, that Soma is the rājā
of us brāhmaṇas. Vājasaneyī Saṃhitā, 9.40.10.18; Taittirīya Saṃhitā, 1.8.10.2;
Baudhāyana Śrauta Sūtra, 10.56, 58.16; Āpastambha Śrauta Sūtra, 18.12.7.
88 Atharvaveda, 5.18, 12.5.
89 Aitareya Brāhmaṇa, 7.29.
90 There has been some romanticization of the freedom of women in Vedic
108 The Past Before Us
Women who are assertive in the narratives tend to be apsarās/
apsarāses. Their celestial origin may explain why they are not
subservient to male control. The apsarā, born of the waters (and
therefore often translated as “water nymph”), appeared from the
churning of the Milk Ocean, which is symbolic of fertility and
plenitude. Apsarās can insist on the hero fulfilling their conditions
before they agree to live with him, as did Urvaśī.91 Their repeated
transgression of the social norms of human society is a comment
on the norms. In terms of lineal descent, the intervention of the
apsarā in the story often marks a break in the lineage, or the
induction perhaps of a new clan, since she is by definition alien.
Therefore if a woman of obscure background bore a son to the
rājā, a possible way of conferring status on her could be that,
in recapitulating the story at a later time, she was said to be an
apsarā.
Genealogical connections and descent gradually come to be
mentioned more often because they are a means of conceptualiz-
ing rights over areas of subsistence, resources, and even territory.
Channelling power into a family or a cluster of families could be
through kinship connections. The need for a clan to select its rājā,
as in the Ṛgveda, could act as a counter to this power, but it was
unlikely to topple families once so established. Claims to status
increase in situations where status cannot be taken for granted
and has to be wrested through confrontation. Contending groups
often resort to remembering multiple pasts, some claiming to be
more authentic.
The diversity of societies disallowed a uniform, unchanging
cultural ideology. What was being sought was a system that could
provide an identity to those in authority but which was, at the
sources. It is emphasized because of the insistence that “Vedic times” were a
Golden Age. The occasional Gārgī who was a philosopher is the proverbial
swallow who does not a summer make. That women were gifted as wealth, as
chattel slaves, is of course not discussed as that would tarnish a Golden Age.
The later and even more evident subordination of women in the Dharmaśāstra
literature drew its legitimacy from the Vedic corpus. U. Chakravarti, “Whatever
Happened to the Vedic Dāsī?”
91 Ṛgveda, 10.95.
Fragmentary Narratives from the Vedas 109
same time, flexible enough to permit, if required, other groups
to be assimilated as part of the identity. This would mean having
to readjust, from time to time, accounts of the activities, idioms,
and social assertions of those who claimed a particular identity:
for example, when those earlier depicted as non-āryas in speech
and ritual come to be included in the lineages of the āryas, the
respected ones. Such readjustments had recourse to a presumed
history.
The rājā’s link to kṣatra becomes evident. The selection of the
rājā is referred to in the context of a war between the gods and
the demons when the former decide that Soma, or in other cases
Indra, the deity with the greatest prowess, should lead them or
appoint a rājā to do so.92 Initially, in the Ṛgveda, the rājā is seen
as a protector, claiming the obedience of those he protected. But
beyond this his power was hemmed in by a range of assemblies—
the vidatha, samiti, sabhā, and pariṣad—some select and some
open, which acted in multiple ways as bodies of deliberation, as
avenues for the redistribution of wealth and booty, as agencies for
conferring status, or as the hub of festivity.
Subsequently, special status was conferred on the rājā via a
series of elaborate yajñas—sacrificial rituals discussed at length
in the Brāhmaṇas and the Śrautasūtras: the abhiṣeka, which was
the initiation into the status of the rājā and was included in many
sacrificial rituals; the rājasūya, which established a rājā,93 and
therefore involved the conquest of the four quarters or the digvi-
jaya and the bringing of tribute, as well as the lavish consumption
and distribution of wealth as part of the proceedings of the ritual;
the aśvamedha, which combined claims to territorial control with
fertility rites; the vājapeya, or rejuvenation rites of a rājā. These
rituals, among others, were elaborate and continuous, in some
cases lasting many months, and required an extensive outlay of
resources.
The attempt to divinize the rājā through these rituals, or at least
associate him with deity, became a counterweight to the political
92 Aitareya Brāhmaṇa, 1.14.2ff., 8.12–17; Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 3.4.2.2–3;
Taittirīya Brāhmaṇa, 3.1.5.9.
93 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 5.2.3.1ff.: rājasūyenetva rājā bhavati.
110 The Past Before Us
role of some of the assemblies of the viś, and to isolate him by
this connection, bringing him even more under the influence of
priests. The move towards kingship as divinely sanctioned was
assisted by ideas—such as that the rājā was the representative of
the god Prajāpati and could therefore rule over people.94
This introduces two levels of power: abstract power and func-
tional power. The greater his dependence on divine intervention as
abstract power, the less was his actual, functional power. The rājā,
in his isolation through associating with a deity, was increasingly
dependent on retainers, such as the ratnins (literally “jewels”), who
also served to set him apart. Because of his supposed access to a
deity, he was said to control events over which ordinary mortals
had no control: for example, the ability to terminate a drought. But
this special power required that he be physically unimpaired so as
to be acceptable to the deities. Physical imperfections disqualified
rājās, and many a narrative hung on this.
The ritual of sacrifice came to involve both those who offered
the sacrifice, the patron or yajamāna, and a large range of ritual
specialists constituting different categories of priests, in particular
the hotṛ, adhvaryu, udgātṛ, and brāhmaṇa. The larger and longer-
lasting sacrificial rituals became occasions for the clan to gather,
the legitimizing of the status of the yajamāna, the channel for
propitiation of and prestations to deities, and the occasion for
redistributing wealth. The last was often limited to reciprocal ex-
changes between the yajamāna and the priests, where the former
was the recipient of intangible “wealth”, such as legitimacy and
status, whereas the latter’s wealth was only too tangible in the form
of dāna (gifts) and daksiṇā (sacrificial fees).95
The performance of a yajña resulted in a generalized reciproc-
ity among the kṣatriyas and a competition in the establishing of
their status on par with a successful cattle-raid. He who bestows
the largest gifts on the priest wins undying fame through eulogies
and hymns of praise. The best of warriors was invariably the one
who also gave most generously of his wealth.96
94 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 5.1.5.14.
95 Ṛgveda, 1.48.3–4, 8.63.12, 8.67, 1.18.1ff.
96 M. Patel, Die Dānastutis des Rigveda.
Fragmentary Narratives from the Vedas 111
The rituals were also a means of collecting wealth before it
was dispersed, and to that extent the rājā becomes the focus.97
The sharing of wealth, implicit in the lavish consumption during
the ritual and the subsequent gift-giving, converted the yajña into
establishing dominance and subordination. This is complicated
by the unequal exchange: tangible wealth is bestowed, intangible
authority is procured. Legitimation ensuing from the gifting of
wealth had a recorded historical continuity from the dāna-stutis
to the royal praśastis (eulogies) of later times.
Despite references to the storing of wealth, such accumula-
tion of wealth remained tenuous. Brāhmaṇa recipients, with their
healthy expectations and praise of gift-giving, doubtless acted as
a check on this accumulation by kṣatriyas, the rituals ensuring a
depletion of their stores. The acquiescence of the kṣatriya in these
rituals was in part a consequence of belief in their efficacy, and in
part that it kept the wealth in their hands until it was dispersed.
This prevented others from tapping the reserves and becoming
a rival source of power. In fact, the destruction of wealth was a
sign of status and prevented a wider distribution of wealth. This
was in some ways a parallel to the potlatch.98
At this stage there was no systematic revenue collection backed
by authority. Terms such as bali, bhāga, and śulka—later to be used
for taxes on the area of land held, on its yield, and on the value of
commodities—were at this time used largely for voluntary first
fruits of the harvest, i.e. prestations which tended to become more
regular with the establishment of an agricultural cycle or where
the power of the kṣatriya drew on gift-giving. The association of
deities with his legitimation began to change the concept of the
rājā as chief, with a momentum leading eventually to kingship.
However, the instituting of a state in the form of a kingdom was
still distant in time.
The gradually changing relationship between the rājā and the
viś becomes apparent. The Ṛgveda speaks of the rājā eating the
ibhyas (wealthy ones) in the same way as Agni consumes the
97 R. Thapar, “Dāna and Dakṣiṇā as Forms of Exchange”, in idem, Cultural
Pasts, 521–35.
98 R. Thapar, From Lineage to State, 65ff.
112 The Past Before Us
forests.99 This simile continues into later texts.100 The rājā or the
kṣatriya who, for the sake of victory, may once have eaten from the
same vessel as the viś,101 is now implicitly separated. The increas-
ing importance of the grāmaṇi (head of the village) indicates a
decline in the negotiating ability of the viś. Kṣatra now combines
political power with charisma, hence the more frequent use of the
term kṣatriya in preference to rājā.102
Conflicts between the rājās are often described as battles, such
as the much-quoted battle of the ten kings—the dāśarājña—but
battles on any large scale were rare; most conflicts were skir-
mishes involving small numbers. When the sacrificial horse of
the aśvamedha was released to wander and thereby claim territory
for the patron, it was guarded by a troop of only four hundred.
The major heroic exploit was still the cattle raid. The pre-eminent
Kuru-Pañcālas, said to be speakers of the best Sanskrit, set out on
cattle-raids in the dewy season and returned after some weeks.
Descriptions of really fearful battles had to wait for the epic
literature. The notion of professional soldiers shows a gradual
reordering of conflict, as do the declining instances of one-to-one
contests between rājanyas.103
My intention in providing this brief survey of the societies re-
flected in the Vedic corpus is to suggest the relevance of embedded
history in these texts (as also incidentally in the subsequent epics);
it also suggests that such history is most often found in lineage-
based societies. References to matters of historical import may
remain fragmented, but when placed in the context of the society
to which they refer their documentary usefulness can be made
more apparent. That said, embedded history is not recognizable
as history. Nevertheless, what it does reveal is a certain perception
of the past which provides evidence for the existence of historical
consciousness. Consequent to this, references specifically claiming
to be historical—to persons and events in earlier times—can lead
to the germination of a historical tradition. These projections of
99 1.65.4.
100 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 13.2.9.6–9; Aitareya Brāhmaṇa, 8.39.3.
101 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 4.3.3.15.
102 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 2.4.3.7, 6.6.1.7, 9.3.1.13.
103 Ṛgveda, 4.24.4.
Fragmentary Narratives from the Vedas 113
the past become increasingly relevant as legitimating strategies
to societies and groups aspiring to power when they are in situa-
tions of conflict, or when situations demand the accommodation
of contending groups through narratives of adjustment. Because
these societies comprised multiple competing groups, such nar-
ratives of the past were functionally necessary as ideological and
hegemonic counterparts of their competition for supremacy.
4. Embedded History in the Dāna-stuti Hymns
When the historical context of certain categories of composi-
tions is analysed, their forms provide clues to the society from
which they emanate. The dāna-stutis—literally, “in praise of gift-
giving”—in the form of hymns or verses in the Ṛgveda, provide
an example. Being essentially a collection of ritual hymns, it is to
this function that studies generally draw attention. However, the
dāna-stutis, although few in number, had an importance of their
own. For this reason they were preserved by being embedded, as
it were, in a compilation of essentially ritual hymns.
The dāna-stutis refer to earlier or current patrons and are the
prototype of forms that became praise poems involving heroes,
actual or fictive. They are included as fragmentary narratives but
mention is also made of them as a specific category in subsequent
texts that comment on some of the narratives of the Ṛgveda,
such as the Bṛhad-devatā, Nirukta, and Anukramaṇīs. These texts
mention the gāthās, nārāśaṃsīs, and raibhīs being of the same
genre as the dāna-stutis. But the first three are found more fre-
quently in the later Vedic corpus and the last in the Ṛgveda.
Unlike the hymns to Soma, the dāna-stutis were not collated
into a single maṇḍala, but like all compositions showcasing
patronage, came to be treated almost as property. They were
claimed by particular families, the assumption being that even the
recitation of ancestral generosity may result in a gift—at least a
milch cow.104 Clan societies generally recorded the activities of
the rājās/rājans.105 Their claim to high birth, enhanced through
104 Ṛgveda, 2.2.9, 10.64.12.
105 T. Earle (ed.), Chiefdoms: Power, Economy and Ideology.
114 The Past Before Us
a heroic act, was eulogized by the poet, for which he received a
gift from the rājā.
When the performance of yajñas became essential to initia-
tion as rājā, the maintenance of that status also became a reason
for eulogizing the chief. The rituals created a bond between the
chief and the ritual specialist, the fulcrum of which was the act
of giving by both to each other, although the gifts so exchanged
were not identical. Gradually, a dakṣinā or fee was given to the
priest and Dakṣinā, the fee personified, in a late hymn indicates
this change.106 To drive home the point, it is said that dakṣinā does
not come from misers, it comes from those who wish to avoid the
dishonour of being called so.107
Wealth and prestige require widespread dissemination of the
recognition; poems of praise composed by the priests and the
panegyrists, as well as by poets—the kavi, rebha, and kāru—
perform this function. If the eulogy pleased the chief, the poet
was rewarded, thus creating the nexus of patronage, central to
the dāna-stuti hymns.
Many dāna-stutis are in the form of specific verses. A rājā,
generally a contemporary, is praised for his munificence in be-
stowing gifts on the composer.108 A few are complete hymns, with
praise being their sole intention.109 Many are placed in the late
maṇḍalas—the First and the Tenth—although the concentration
is in the Eighth Book of the Kaṇvas. Some of those in the late
maṇḍalas refer to patrons of earlier times. Hero-lauds are referred
to interchangeably as stuti, stoma, or stotra,110 terms that are also
used in praising the gods, which may have given rise to the idea
of praising the chief. The exploits of Indra—the attacker of purs,
the winner of cattle, and the lord of wealth—are imitated by the
rājās.111
The event eulogized is rather mundane and hardly occasions
106 Ṛgveda, 10.107.
107 Ṛgveda, 10.107.3.
108 M. Patel, Die Dānastutis des Rigveda; P.V. Kane, History of Dharmasastra,
vol. II, 837ff.
109 Ṛgveda, 8.1.31–3, 2.41–2; Bṛhad-devatā, 3.142ff., 5.62ff.
110 Ṛgveda, 7.32.18–19, 5.18.5.
111 Ṛgveda, 8.5.10ff.
Fragmentary Narratives from the Vedas 115
inclusion in a compilation of ritual hymns. However, an associa-
tion with the deity may, in some instances, be the justification. It
has been suggested that these hymns may have been added later.112
But the sentiments they evoke are intrinsic to clan societies and
their concerns. Equal, if not more significant, is the importance
of their role as a record of what was assumed to have happened—
what is said to be itihāsa, and this was likely to be better preserved
if embedded in a ritual text.
The composer of the dāna-stuti would claim that the hymn
made the rājan immortal—rājano amṛtasya.113 If immortality is
understood as undying fame, then this is a valid claim; today we
know about these rājas largely through this category of hymns.
Such dāna-stutis were said to ensure the glory of the rāja even in
heaven.114 In a late hymn a bard states that he was the eulogist to
Mitrātithi, grandfather of the current rājā, Upamaśravas.115 This
suggests that some bards were attached to the family or clan of
the rājā, a hoary tradition continuing even into the recent pres-
ent. Authorship of such hymns could be that of a single poet or
a group of poets.116
Sometimes there is an invocation of the deity with the appeal
that the composer rapidly acquire a generous patron. Of the dei-
ties invoked, the two most popular are Indra and Agni, although
the Maruts, Vāyu, Uṣas, the Aśvins, and Mitra-Varuṇa are also
described as assisting the donor to victory, or as witnessing the
gift given, or even as exemplars of gift-giving.117 The poet claims
that the intervention of the deity is the result of the poet’s in-
vocation.
The more munificent rājās were projected almost as gods in
their generosity. Deities can be unimaginably generous— doubt-
less a hint to encourage extravagance among the rājās. Praise of
112 H. Grassman, Worterbuch zum Rigveda, vol. II; A.B. Keith, History of
Sanskrit Literature, 49ff.
113 Ṛgveda, 1.122.7–15.
114 Ṛgveda, 1.126.2.
115 Ṛgveda, 10.33.6–7.
116 Ṛgveda, 8.1.16, 1.126.4, 7.18.
117 Ṛgveda, 6.47.22, 6.27.9, 6.37.4, 5.52.17, 1.122.14, 8.24.28–30, 6.63.9–10,
8.5.37, 5.18.3, 5.27.1, 5.34.9, 1.122.7–9.
116 The Past Before Us
the deity elides to praise of the donor. The status of the donor had
to be high, even if he was a dāsa, and his name had to be men-
tioned. This gives the narrative a hint of authenticity. The notion of
the bard as the moral conscience of the hero was as yet absent.
A recitation of the exploits, past or current, of the human hero
follows, together with a listing of the gifts which the composer
received. A particularly generous patron, Kuruśravana, is grate-
fully remembered after his death by the bard, and the patron’s son
and grandson are reminded of his generosity.118 The Bharadvāja
priests are said to have been handsomely rewarded.119 The as-
sumption is that if the gifts from past occasions are magnified,
those in the present will enlarge.
Of the many patrons, some are singled out for special mention.
Abhyāvartin Cāyamāna attacked the Vṛṣīvants at Hariyūpīyā.120
Successive generations of a family—Sṛñjaya, Sahadeva, and
Somaka—claim exploits.121 Sudās, the son of Pijavana,122 was of the
Bharata clan. Sudās defeated the rājās Varcin and Śambara. The
Sṛñjayas were his allies and helped him overcome the alliance of
ten rājās, referred to as the dāśarājña.123 The ten clans opposing
Sudās are described as those who do not perform yajñas, which
gives them an ambiguous cultural identity. The ten consist of those
mentioned often—the Yadu, Turvaśa, Anu, Druhyu, and Pūru;
as well as those mentioned infrequently—the Pakthas, Bhalānas,
Alinas, Śivas, and Visānins. Of the first five, the Anu and the Druhyu
seem less important. The Bhṛgus are the priests of the Druhyu
but are linked also to the yatis whom Indra tried to feed to jack-
als.124 The Yadu and the Turvaśa are often coupled, especially
when being rescued from a flood by Indra.125 The Yadu were
generous patrons and fought against both Sudās and Śambara.
Of the Pūrus, Trasadasyu—whose father was Purukutsa and
118 Ṛgveda, 10.33.4; cf. 10.32.9, 1.33.4.
119 Ṛgveda, 6.47.22–5, 8.46.21–3, 10.33.4–5.
120 Ṛgveda, 6.27.4–8, 4.15.7–10.
121 Ṛgveda, 6.47.
122 Nirukta of Yāska 2.24.
123 Ṛgveda, 7.18, 7.33, 7.83.
124 Ṛgveda, 8.3.9, 6.18.
125 Ṛgveda, 1.174.9, 4.30.17, 5.31.8.
Fragmentary Narratives from the Vedas 117
son Kuruśravaṇa—were settled in the Suvastu/Swat region of
the north-west. Another rājā, Bhāvya, dwelt on the banks of the
Sindhu.126 Pṛthuśravas, the son of Kanīta, gave handsomely.127
Kaśu, son of the Cedi rājā, is said to be particularly generous.128
A hundred buffaloes come as a gift from another Cedi.129 Many of
these clans are referred to in later texts and their activities treated
as having happened in the past.
Among the dāsa chiefs, Śambara was feared since he was tar-
geted among those attacked with the aid of Indra. He controlled
a large number of pur (enclosed settlements).130 His main foe was
Divodāsa Atithigva. Śambara referred to himself as devakā, a more
honourable title than given to most dāsas, and is remembered for
his immense treasures.131 Divodāsa gives the poet the booty taken
from Śambara.132 On another occasion, the dāsas Balbūtha and
Tarukṣa are mentioned as givers of wealth.133 It seems apparent
from this that the battle lines were not drawn on the basis of ethnic
identities, if these did in fact exist; the panegyrists were happy to
receive gifts from whoever was willing to give them.
Where the patrons are niggardly, they are described in a satirical
manner, such as Śāra, the son of Suradeva, who gave only a single
calf to three poets.134 Possibly, this was in fact the order of wealth
that came the way of poets, and the extravagant descriptions need
to be taken with a pinch of salt.
In the information provided on the rājās, the genealogical depth
is shallow and rarely exceeds four or five generations; even these
are not listed as a succession. Descent is usually not given within
single hymns but has to be collated from scattered references. In an
earlier hymn, Trasdasyu is described as the son of Purukutsa; and
126 Ṛgveda, 1.126.1.
127 Ṛgveda, 1.116.21, 8.46.21.
128 Ṛgveda, 8.5.37.
129 Ṛgveda, 8.5.37–9.
130 W. Rau, “The Meaning of Pur in Vedic Literature”, 1ff.
131 Ṛgveda, 1.51.6.
132 Ṛgveda, 6.47.22; A.A. Macdonell and A.B. Keith, Vedic Index, vol. II,
355.
133 Ṛgveda, 8.46.32.
134 Ṛgveda, 8.70.15.
118 The Past Before Us
in a later hymn mention is made of Upamaśravas as a descendant,
suggesting an authentic lineage link. Repeated references to the
same fathers and sons but in different contexts, as in the case of
Sṛñjaya or Sudās, could suggest that some at least of these may
have been known persons and not mythical figures.
The Bharatas and the Pūrus who were not allies in the Ṛgveda
are prominent as lineages in later texts, such as the Brāhmaṇas
and the Mahābhārata, and as part of the prominent Kuru–Pañcāla
confederacy. Among the Bharatas, Divodāsa is mentioned a few
times but the more authoritative rājā was Sudās.135 The Brāhmaṇas
have fragments of narrative associated with these rājās. The
Mahābhārata stories, however, revolve around later descendants.
The Pūru descent in the Ṛgveda is not repeated at any length in
the epic.136 There is a suggested identity between the Pūrus and
Purukutsa.137 Pūru is part of the alliance against Sudās. The epi-
thet mṛdhravāc (of harsh or incorrect speech) is used for Pūru,
whose ancestor is said to be an asura rākṣasa,138 thus indicating
a difference in speech and descent. The clans who allied against
Sudās are nevertheless described as ayajyavāḥ, meaning “those
that do not perform the sacrificial rites”.139 One of the composers
is said to be Kavaṣa, possibly the Kavaṣa Ailūṣa mentioned in
the Aitareya Brāhmaṇa as the son of a dāsī. The internal evidence
points to the coexistence, whether harmonious or hostile, of clans
not identical in culture. The dāna-stuti hymns provide one version
of this coexistence.
The Ṛgveda tends to speak of single clans but the need for self-
protection and exploiting resources probably encouraged the idea
of confederation; but alliances changed, in part because the enemy
was not constant and in part because migrations were essential to
the search for pastures and water.
Of conflicts, two in particular stand out. One is the much dis-
cussed dāśarājña, when Sudās leading the Bharatas and Tṛtsus
135 Ṛgveda, 3.53.9, 33.11.12, 7.18, 7.20, 7.33.
136 Ṛgveda, 8.19, 10.33.6–7; Bṛhad-devatā, 7.35–6.
137 Ṛgveda, 6.20.10 and 1.63.7.
138 Ṛgveda, 7.18.13. Even if he was speaking Prākrit, as has been suggested,
it was different from Vedic Sanskrit. Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 6.8.1.14.
139 Ṛgveda, 7.83.7.
Fragmentary Narratives from the Vedas 119
defeated a confederacy of ten clans.140 Although it is translated
as “battle”, it was hardly of a formal order and was more a de-
fence of the water sources on the river Paruṣṇī, with a skirmish
on its banks. The description of this event comes from hymns in
the maṇḍala attributed to the Vasiṣṭhas. The latter were closely
associated with the Tṛtsus, and this may have contributed to the
narration of the rout of the enemies. Another conflict involved
Abhyāvartin Cāyamāna defeating the Vṛṣīvant at Hariyūpīyā.141
These were victories over other clans and chiefs who were not
invariably fantasized into demons, even though the conflict was
sometimes between those described as āryas and at other times
between āryas and dāsas.
The heroic exploit that compelled the composition of a eulogy
is described in glowing terms, followed by an enumeration of the
wealth bestowed by the rājā on the poet as reward for the eulogy.
Wealth is listed as cattle, horses, camels, chariots, wagons, gar-
ments, treasure chests, pieces of gold and jars with gold, and dāsīs;
dogs, sheep, calves, colts, and asses carry less value. Mention is
also made of copper utensils, bamboo objects, and the skin from
the soma plant after pressing.142 By far the most valuable of these
were horses and cattle, sometimes listed in clearly exaggerated
figures. Horses range from a single steed to many thousands. Some
poets claim to have received 1000 cows and others 60,000 head of
cattle.143 Such figures are formulaic, as are 100, 1000, and 10,000,
since the same figure is at times repeated for an entire list. The
wish for more and more cows is the dream of cattle-herders.
The reference to vadhū, fifty in number, among the gifts of
Kuruśravaṇa,144 was read as “women” by Sāyaṇa, the commenta-
tor on the Ṛgveda of medieval times, but others have read it as the
female of any species. Dāsas are rarely listed as wealth in these
hymns, but dāsīs are. Did the dāsī refer at this point to a captured
woman from the dāsa community, as seems likely in the context, or
was the term already being used for a woman slave in a household?
140 Ṛgveda, 7.18.
141 Ṛgveda, 6.27.4–8.
142 M. Patel, Die Dānastutis des Rigveda, 64ff.
143 Ṛgveda, 8.4.19–20, 6.63.10.
144 Ṛgveda, 8.19.36.
120 The Past Before Us
The wealth as listed was largely associated with pastoralism and
with chiefdoms and was utility wealth. The dāna-stutis reflect the
wishful thinking of a society eager for wealth.145
The notion of an exchange of wealth here assumes reciprocity.
Exchange creates a bond between donor and recipient, and this in
turn creates a variety of greater or lesser obligations. Reciprocal
gifts can be of equal value or, as in this case, of unequal material
value but of equal significance, although different in form and
kind. There is, however, a nucleus of the concept of redistribu-
tion in the processing of this wealth. The booty collected from
skirmishes and raids seems to have been taken to a central place,
possibly the assembly of the vidatha, where it was distributed.
Hymns addressed to Bhāga, literally “the share”, clarify the per-
sonified Bhāga as the distributor.146
The poet, however, was given his gift directly by the rājā. The
figures mentioned by the poets are doubtful as it would have been
unlikely for an agro-pastoral community to produce such wealth—
even if only animal wealth. Later too, when the performance of
a yajña demanded the expending of wealth, the actual gift-giving
is likely to have been much less than stated. The elaborate rituals
in the later corpus call for prestations and offerings—bali, bhāga,
and śulka. These come from the viś and are directed to the yaja-
māna. The rājā’s control over the viś had increased by this time,
facilitating the extraction of wealth.147 Nevertheless, the yajña
could curb the acquisition of wealth by a rājā, thereby enabling a
balance between the authority of the rājā and the brāhmaṇa.
The gifting of land, which was to be introduced some centuries
later, is conspicuously absent, as it also is in the listing of wealth
in the Mahābhārata.148 The clan had the right to use the land it
claimed to control but none had the right of individual ownership.
Even in the later corpus, where mention is made indirectly of land
being given by the patron to the ritual specialist to establish a
145 Archaeological sites ranging from 1700 to 600 bc have not revealed great
wealth. Burials, unfortunately for historians, are absent, but were unlikely to
have yielded dramatic wealth.
146 Ṛgveda, 7.41.2, 9.97.55.
147 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 8.7.2.3, 5.1.3.3, 13.2.2.15.
148 Mahābhārata, Sabhāparvan, 47–8.
Fragmentary Narratives from the Vedas 121
settlement, it is not an outright gift, and furthermore requires the
approval of the viś.149 Grants of land even as dakṣinā are debated
and at one point strongly contested.150 Generally, the best in dāna
and dakṣinā consisted of gold, cattle, garments, and horses.151 Land
is a permanent investment and changes the status of the donee as
well as his relationship with the donor.
Wealth actually or even supposedly given on such occasions
becomes a form of social gradation, as well as a part of the gift
exchange implicit in the relationship between patron and poet.152
There is an awareness of the distinction between those with wealth
and the rest of the clan. Patrons are generally the rājās and rarely
others. The access to wealth and its acquisition is an evident con-
cern. It has been argued that the word arya refers to one who is
wealthy.153 This is also suggested in Pāṇini, who glosses arya as
aryaḥsvāmivaiśyayoḥ, meaning “a lord or a vaiśya”, i.e. a man of
wealth.154 Can the argument be taken further that the association
with a magnanimous gift, even if fictive, could be used as a way
of raising the status of those whose origins were obscure, both of
the donor and the recipient?
Gift-giving was to remain a nexus between political authority
and priestly function, and was intensified when the yajña became
the pivot in this relationship. In a vertical division of society into
lineages with an absence of overall central authority, gift obliga-
tions kept a check on those desirous of acquiring the greatest
resources. Since gift-giving symbolized mutual dependence and
reciprocity, the gift could, up to a point, take on the dimensions
of a ritual item: its quantity or financial value need not be taken
literally.155 What was important were the social and economic
consequences of the act.
149 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 7.1.1.4.
150 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 13.7.1.13–15.
151 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 4.3.4.7.
152 R. Thapar, “Dāna and Dakṣinā as Forms of Exchange”, in idem, Cultural
Pasts, 521–35.
153 H.W. Bailey, “Iranian Arya and Daha”, 71ff.
154 Aṣṭādhyāyī of Pāṇini, 3.1.103.
155 M. Mauss, The Gift; C.A. Gregory, Gifts and Commodities; R. Thapar,
“Dāna and Dakṣinā as Forms of Exchange”, in idem, Cultural Pasts, 521–35.
122 The Past Before Us
It is axiomatic that the wealthy person must give of his gen-
erosity when requested: dado maghāni maghavaniyanaḥ.156 If the
figures given by the poets were in any way accurate, then they in
turn would have been required to gift wealth to others. But we hear
none of this, which indicates that the actual wealth gifted to them
was probably small. The nuances change somewhat when the gift-
giving is linked to the yajña. The axis of the sacrificial act could be
the gift, where the reciprocation is implicit.157 This is summarized
in the statement dehi me dadāmi te me dehi te dadhe.158
5. The Yajña as the Occasion for
Invoking the Past
Of the generous patrons described in the dāna-stuti hymns, some
continue to be remembered in later sources where they are de-
scribed as pūrve mahārājāḥ śrotriyāḥ, the great rājās who were
patrons in ancient times. The rājasūya ritual required reciting
the list of earlier consecrated rājās, some of whom performed
yajñas. Mention is made in particular of Purukutsa the Ikṣvāku,
Trasadasyu, Kakṣivant Auśija, Janamejaya the son of Parikṣit,
Marutta Avikṣita the Ayogava, Kraivya the Pañcāla, Bharata
Dauḥṣanta, Dvaitavana the Matsya, and Para Āṭṇāra of Kosala.159
The identity of the rājā was linked to the clan. Where the ritual
was a prayer for progeny, each ended up with a thousand sons.
Therefore, the effectiveness of the sacrifice was also endorsed!
These references cover a large geographical area of the western
and middle Ganges plain, and therefore incorporate traditions
from an extensive region.
That this material was embedded in ritual was, as earlier sug-
gested, in part because the ritual gave it longevity and status and
was a means of eliding change: old practices could give way to new
ones, or new ones could enter relatively unobtrusively and give a
156 Ṛgveda, 7.29.1.
157 J. Gonda, “Gifts and Giving in the Rigveda”, in idem, Selected Studies,
vol. IV.
158 Taittirīya Samhitā, 1.8.4.1; cf. Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 2.5.3.19.
159 Jaiminīya Upaniṣad Brāhmaṇa, 2.6.11; Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa, 25.16.3;
Taittirīya Saṃhitā, 5.6.5; Aitareya Brāhmaṇa, 8.21–3; Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa,
13.5.4.1ff.; Atharvaveda, 20.127.7; Śāṇkhāyana Śrautasūtra, 16.9.
Fragmentary Narratives from the Vedas 123
new or additional meaning to the ritual. The names of rājās and
their clans participating in the public rituals are correlated with
the names of the priests performing the ritual for them. Such lists
could well have been arbitrarily adjusted since accuracy was not
their function. They sought sanction from the past for the present.
The lists became a way of legitimizing rājās’ claims to links with
earlier ones. They could have resulted either from some rājās
being challenged, or others maintaining that innovations were
traditional. The perceived past had to be carefully memorized. A
link with the past is also sought in the rituals dedicated to ances-
tors, such as the piṇḍapitṛ yajña.
A comparison of gift-giving in the Ṛgveda with that in the
Brāhmaṇas suggests that, although the cultural emphases of lan-
guage and rituals had undergone change, the rājās of earlier times
continued to be evoked. The preservation of separate identities
among clans from past times gave way to a considerable mingling
of peoples in the creation of new identities. The trend was towards
confederation, involving larger territorial units—one among other
factors that encouraged the creation of kingdoms by the mid-first
millennium bc. The emerging culture was an amalgam of ārya and
dāsa, with their diverse languages and ritual practices but with
different degrees of proximity or separation.
A continuation of the idea of the dāna-stuti, and perhaps re-
cognition of the usefulness of the form in creating a perspective on
the past, is referred to in the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa.160 In the context
of the aśvamedha ritual, two vīnāgāthins are mentioned, rājanya
and brāhmaṇa, who sing the praises of the patron, the sacrifices he
offered, his victories, and the gifts he distributed. The bifurcation
of the task of eulogizing the patron gave a new dimension to the
relationship and in some ways made it more important, with both
a brāhmaṇa and rājanya now reciting the rājā’s stuti, accepting
the legitimacy of its role.
Similar to the dāna-stutis were the compositions referred to as
raibhis, gāthās, and nārāśaṃsīs, which are on occasion linked.161
160 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 13.1.5.1–6.
161 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 13.4.3.3–5, 13.4.2.8, 13.5.4.1–24; P. Horsch, Die
Vedische Gatha und Sloka Literatur; Atharvaveda, 15.6.4; Taittirīya Brāhmaṇa
1.3.2.6, 7.5.11.2, 13.2.6; Bṛhad-devatā, 3.154; Ṛgveda, 1.126.1, 2.34.6, 6.24.2,
8.32.1, 9.99.4, 10.85.6; Aitareya Brāhmaṇa, 6.32; Gopatha Brāhmaṇa, 2.6.12.
124 The Past Before Us
The gāthās are thought to be epic fragments that may have been
added later to the Vedas at appropriate places. The emphasis shifts
from extolling the heroic exploit to extolling the rājā for holding
a sacrificial ritual and giving a handsome dakṣinā to the priests,
regardless of whatever heroic exploits he may have performed.
The poetic function is subordinated to the priestly, but the need to
remember precedents is emphasized. This emphasis is new when
compared to the dāna-stutis of the Ṛgveda.
With the ritual running over many days, the recitation of nar-
ratives became a way of retaining the attention of the participants
and the audience. The reward for the poet, where not explicitly
stated, was implicit in the act of composing and reciting the
narrative. The eulogistic content is so evident that the composi-
tions are sometimes dismissed as untrue, although it is not clear
whether the falsity refers to the size of the gift rather than the
exploit.162 It could suggest that there was an accepted version, or
perhaps a memory of an event, with which these versions were
being compared.
The gāthins who sang the gāthās were the precursors or asso-
ciates of the professional bards of later times, the vīnāgāthins com-
posing verses on “battles”. The gāthā was also incorporated into
the gṛhya or domestic rituals, especially in rites to ensure heroic
offspring.163 The prototypes were the Indra-gāthā, the song in praise
of Indra as the deity who destroys the strongholds of the enemy
and helps various rājās against their foes, a similar sentiment to
that expressed in the sūktas, such as those of Nābhānediṣṭha.164 A
few of the rājās who feature in the dāna-stutis are also referred
to in the gāthās. Others are new names of a later date.
The composition of the gāthās has been linked to the Kaṇva
brāhmaṇas. This would not be surprising as the dāna-stuti hymns
are found largely in the Kaṇva book of the Ṛgveda. Some gāthās
recall rājās who performed the aśvamedha in the past,165 such as
162 Taittirīya Saṃhitā, 5.1.8.2; Kāṭhaka Saṃhitā, 14.5; Maitrāyaṇi Saṃhitā,
1.11.5; Aitareya Āraṇyaka, 2.3.6; Taittirīya Brāhmaṇa, 1.3.2.6–7.
163 Āśvalāyana Gṛhya Sūtra, 1.14.6–7.
164 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 13.5.4.1ff.; Aitareya Brāhmaṇa, 6.32.1ff.; Athar-
vaveda, 20.128.12–16.
165 Aitareya Brāhmaṇa, 8.21–3; Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 13.5.4.1ff.; Śāṇkhāyana
Śrautasūtra, 16.9.
Fragmentary Narratives from the Vedas 125
the Kuru-Pañcāla. The poems praised heroes as conquerors of the
earth,166 and as performers of the aśvamedha.167 But they were
not restricted to rājās and could refer to others; and they could
be recited individually or as a cluster.168
The rituals in the later corpus expand in number, complexity,
and time, becoming central statements of the political and as-
sertive aspects of power—both sacred and profane. The heroes
are sometimes ascribed the status of pitṛs (ancestors) because
they belong to the past. They are listed in the commentaries on
the ritual.169 A specific set of ten nārāśaṃsīs (hero-lauds) has to
be sung at a particular point in the ritual.170 Of these, the better
known are those of Śunaḥśepa’s release from being sacrificed and
his induction into the clan of the high-status Viśvāmitra; Kakṣi-
vant attaining the status of a brāhmaṇa despite being of dāsī
descent; Vasiṣṭha being the purohita of Sudās and replacing
Viśvāmitra; Vatsa, although initially dismissed as the son of a śūdra
woman, successfully claiming brahmanhood; and Nābhānediṣṭha
obtaining gifts from Aṅgirasa. The shift in these narratives lies in
the emphasis not being on heroic acts alone but on the acquisition
of high status, sometimes projected as the obtaining of a special
gift. Some were mentioned in the Ṛgveda but are now backed with
narratives to provide precedents and refresh memories. Where the
verse is addressed to a living recipient,171 the kavi is said to have
a tongue of honey!172
The process of acculturation is evident whenever there is an
interface among varying societies. The acquiring of status involves
eulogizing those that both bestowed and received status. Its signifi-
cance is reflected in later texts that relate the narratives, sometimes
expanding on a passing reference in the Ṛgveda. That status had to
be acquired, sometimes through elaborate means, tends to give a
166 Yāska defines it as yena narāḥ praśasyante sa nārāśamso mantrāḥ: Nirukta
of Yāska, 9.9.
167 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 11.5.6.8.
168 Śāṅkhāyana Śrautasūtra, 16.2.
169 Aitareya Brāhmaṇa, 7.27ff., 7.34, 8.14, 8.21–3; Kauṣītaki Brāhmaṇa,
26.5, 28.4ff.
170 Śāṅkhāyana Śrautasūtra, 16.11.1ff.
171 Bṛhad-devatā, 3.154 [T-3.125]; 7.139 [T-7.109]—‘T-’ here in square brack-
ets, and hereafter, indicates the translation by M. Tokunaga.
172 Ṛgveda, 10.62, 5.5.2, 1.13.3.
126 The Past Before Us
touch of credibility to the story, although of course these elaborate
means could be part of an understood rhetorical practice.
To the extent that the nārāśaṃsī narratives focus on status and
are linked to a yajña, they differ somewhat from the dāna-stuti
and the gāthā. The narrative is not radically changed in these later
texts, even where it is not too complimentary to those involved.
Was this intended as a hint of authenticity?
The nārāśaṃsīs were incorporated into the large sacrificial
rituals,173 some referring to rājās and settlements,174 mentioning
the name of the rājā, the jana to which he belonged, his priest,
and often the location of the sacrifice.175 References are made
to earlier performances of the ritual, as when Śatānika Śatrajita
performed the aśvamedha after taking away the sacrificial horse
from the rājā of Cedi; or that Māthava the Videgha went eastwards
with Agni to the area of what later was called Videha, which had
to be cleared and settled.176
The significance of these compositions was that they preserv­
ed a notion of past personalities and events which they wanted
posterity to remember. This also meant recalling the believed
history of those who had been inducted into the society of the
ārya, as for example the dāsyaḥ putraḥ brāhmaṇas. Thus, prior
to the rājasūya, mention is made of the important brāhmaṇas
who had conducted sacrificial rituals for important rājās. Tura
Kavaṣeya sacrificed for Janamejaya Parikṣit, a name echoing the
Kavaṣa of the Ṛgveda; or Parvata and Naraka, who sacrificed for
Somaka, Sahadeva, and Babhru; or Vasiṣṭha for Sudās Paijavana,
familiar from the Ṛgveda.177 Further in the same text there is a
list of rājās who underwent the mahābhiṣeka and then performed
the aśvamedha. Included among these were Janamejaya Parikṣit,
Sudās Paijavana, Marutta Āvikṣita, Bharata Dauḥṣanti, and Dur­
mukha Pañcāla. An attempt was being made, first, to endow such
names and their narratives with some claim to historicity; second,
173 Śāṅkhāyana Śrautasūtra, 16.10.1ff., 16.11.1ff.
174 U.N. Ghoshal, Beginnings of Indian Historiography and Other Essays,
17ff.
175 Aitareya Brāhmaṇa, 8.21–3.
176 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 13.5.4.19, 1.4.1.14–17.
177 Aitareya Brāhmaṇa, 7.34.
Fragmentary Narratives from the Vedas 127
ensure their preservation by ensconcing them within rituals; and
third, through reciting the narrative as part of the ritual, deliber-
ately connecting a believed past to the present.
At a more mundane level there was also the element of com-
parison. Thus if the munificence of earlier patrons were extolled,
contemporary patrons might be provoked into following their
example. There was an obsession with the correct performance
of the ritual and the correct pronunciation of the mantras. The
Sṛñjayas were defeated because of a mistake in the ritual.178 The
perfection of the ritual also gave added importance to the priest.
Bolstering this, attempts were made to explain what were be-
lieved to be the historical origins of certain ritual sacrifices, thus
providing a rationale for their performance should their efficacy
be doubted. Evidently, there was a need to propagate the rituals to
ensure livelihood, status, and authority for those performing them,
and the fragmentary historical tradition as it was then perceived
was brought into service.
6. The Ākhyānas
The dāna-stuti hymns, gāthās, and nārāśaṃsīs were fragments of
heroic poetry and became part of the material which went into the
making of larger poetic narratives, the kathās and the kāvyas. But
heroic exploits, situations of political authority, and the acquisition
of status by individuals were narrated as ākhyānas, included in the
later Vedic corpus. This genre is especially characteristic of the
rituals in the aśvamedha, where the pāriplava is a year-long cycle
of ākhyānas,179 and is also recited in the rājasūya.180
The distinction between nārāśaṃsīs and ākhyānas was not
sharp and some themes were listed variously in these categories.
But the function of the ākhyāna as part of a ritual focusing on
sovereignty and supremacy, almost cosmological in intent, lends
a different connotation to this category.181 Ākhyānas were recited
178 Atharvaveda 5.19.1; Kāṭhaka Saṃhitā, 12.3; Taittirīya Saṃhitā, 6.6.2.2.3.
179 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 13.4.3.2ff.
180 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 13.4.3.2ff.
181 Śāṅkhāyana Śrautasūtra, 15.12.1ff.
128 The Past Before Us
at particular points of the ritual or were part of its commentaries.
Or else an event from the past was linked to the efficacy of the
ritual, as for instance in the statement that because a particular
rājā did not perform a Soma sacrifice, the Kurus were forced out
of Kurukṣetra.182 Some ākhyānas are specifically referred to as
itihāsa.
The context of gift-giving gradually changed from dāna, a gift,
to including dakṣinā, a fee to the ritual specialist for performing
a ritual of legitimation for the rājā. The dāna-stuti hymns were
seminal to the praśasti (eulogy), most often linked to kings in
later periods.
Because the ākhyānas are a regular part of certain rituals, the
rituals may be summarized here.183 The rājasūya was generally
performed after a digvijaya (conquest of the four quarters), con-
ducted by the rājā and his kinsmen. It could only be performed
by a kṣatriya and was a consecration ritual. The earlier rituals
included the ratninām havīṃśi, with the rājā briefly visiting
the homes of the twelve jewels—professionally differentiated
members of the community on whom the rājā was dependent for
various functions. These included the sūta/charioteer or bard. The
consecration ritual took five days and had to be performed by a
hotṛ who was a Bhṛgu. The announcement was then made that the
yajamāna, the patron of the sacrifice, was in effect the rājā. The
story of Śunaḥśepa is recited, perhaps symbolizing an elevation
in status by his induction into a superior clan; wealth is donated
by the rājā to the priests; his son is recognized; and he conducts a
mock cattle-raid. Equally significant is the game of dice as part of
the ritual, umpired by all those connected with the distribution of
wealth in the society—the saṃgrahītṛ, bhāgadugha, kṣattṛ—and
clearly the game is symbolic of allotments of resources and the
wealth that each carries. These are the essential actions in claims
to chiefship. There is a further period of offerings to the gods and
dakṣinā to the priests. After a full year, the rituals of consecration
move towards completion.
182 Śāṅkhāyana Śrautasūtra, 15.16.11.
183 See P.V. Kane, History of Dharmasastra, II.2.1214ff.; II.1.1228ff.; J.C.
Heesterman, The Inner Conflict of Tradition.
Fragmentary Narratives from the Vedas 129
The aśvamedha is perhaps hinted at in a seminal form in a
couple of late hymns of the Ṛgveda.184 In the later sections of the
corpus it is described as an elaborate ritual lasting many months
and performed by those who qualified as consecrated rājās. The
intention was to claim territory, sovereignty, and prosperity, and
conclude with an evocation of fertility. After due rituals, a white
horse was let loose to wander where it willed, protected by a troop
of four hundred, and the rājā was entitled to claim the territory
over which the horse wandered for a year. However, if the horse
was captured, the sacrifice was void. Hence the advice, in passing,
that the reins of the horse should be firmly held! Meanwhile, the
hotṛ was to recite narratives for a year in cycles of ten days each—
the pāriplava cycle. The audience was the rājā and his kinsmen,
other priests, and the community of householders. Much of what
was recited was linked to eulogies of the rājā, and the more gener-
ous the patron the more exalted the praise. After a year the horse
was brought back, the rājā consecrated again, animals sacrificed,
and the horse ritually killed. This was followed by fertility rituals
involving the chief wife of the rājā and the dead horse. The many
priests involved were recipients of much wealth from the rājā.
Despite the centrality of the aśvamedha, kings in later periods
claiming to perform the aśvamedha were more likely treating it
as a symbolic ritual.
The origin of the ākhyāna has been sought in the dialogue
hymns of the late sections of the Ṛgveda arguing that the prose
portions are lost and only the verses survive.185 Examples of dia -
logue hymns are the Yama-Yamī;186 Saramā and the Paṇis;187 and,
pre-eminently, Purūravas and Urvaśī .188 The ākhyāna of Śunaḥśepa
first finds mention as a name in the Ṛgveda,189 and is elsewhere
listed as nārāśaṃsī,190 with the ākhyāna being an elaboration of
184 1.162, 1.163.
185 L. Alsdorf, “The Ākhyāna Theory Reconsidered”, 197ff.
186 Ṛgveda, 10.10.
187 Ṛgveda, 10.108.
188 Ṛgveda, 10.95.
189 Aitareya Brāhmaṇa, 7.13ff.
190 5.2.7, 1.24.13; Śāṅkhāyana Śrautasūtra, 16.11.1. See 15.17–27 for the
narrative.
130 The Past Before Us
a narrative thought to be significant. There is a qualitative dif-
ference between the gāthās and nārāśaṃśīs and the ākhyānas. In
the Nirukta, Yāska refers to the ākhyānas and itihāsas of earlier
times.191 In still later sources, both ākhyāna and ākhyāyika seem
to be used in the context of itihāsa-purāṇa.192
The pāriplava was a revolving, recurrent, cycle of narratives
incorporating ākhyānas. These were narrated at specific points
in the ritual, in part to fill in time between the rites.193 They were
recited by the hotṛ, or later by the paurāṇika sauti, the bard famil-
iar with old narratives. Power and fertility are common themes.194
Mention was made of the rājās of the past who, it was claimed,
had performed the aśvamedha and the cycle became thereby a
mechanism for remembering a past. These recitations were the
likely forerunners of the reciting of kathās, some of which eventu-
ally evolved into epics. Remembering the narratives was probably
thought necessary for new generations, or newly inducted people
who formed part of the audience at the ritual. The ākhyānavid was
proficient in narrating stories of the past. The aitihāsika com-
mented on the stories and was familiar with the ākhyānas.195
A few of the ākhyānas concern deities and may have been
intended as prototypes.196 Others, categorized as itihāsa, are nar-
ratives about humans such as Devāpi and Śantanu, as related in
the Bṛhad-devatā.197 The story of Devāpi is preceded by the state-
ment that Yāska regards the ākhyāna as a samvādam (dialogue),
whereas Śaunaka regards it as an itihāsa.198 Devāpi is mentioned
earlier in a late hymn of the Ṛgveda which focuses on a prayer
191 Nirukta of Yāska, 2.10, 2.24, 5.21, 7.7, 9.13, 10.26, 11.19, 11.25, 12.10. See
also Bṛhad-devatā, 1.53 [T-1.49].
192 Aṣṭādhyāyī of Pāṇini, 6.2.103, 4.2.60. The Arthaśāstra of Kauṭilya includes
itihāsa as important to the education of a prince and adds that it consists of
purāṇa, itivṛtta, ākhyāyika, udāharaṇa, dharmaśāstra, and arthaśāstra: 1.5.12.
193 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 13.4.3.2ff.; Taittirīya Brāhmaṇa, 3.9.14.4; R.D.
Karmakar, “The Pāriplava at the Aśvamedha”, 26–40.
194 Śāṅkhāyana Śrautasūtra, 16.1.22, 16.2.36, 16.10.13; Lāṭyāyana Śrauta
Sūtra, 9.9.10ff.
195 Nirukta of Yāska, 2.10, 12.1, 5.21.
196 Bṛhad-devatā, 3.156ff. [T-3.126; 4.66; 4.59; 6.99; 6.75–82].
197 7.155-9 [T-7.125ff.; see pp. 281–2].
198 7.153 [T-7.124].
Fragmentary Narratives from the Vedas 131
for rain.199 This story is enlarged in later sources to refer to two
brothers, Devāpi and Śantanu, of the Kuru lineage. The elder is
said to have had a tvagdoṣa (skin disease), which disqualified him
from ruling. He anointed Śantanu and went to the forest. But this
was such a severe infringement of primogeniture that it brought
on a twelve-year drought. Śantanu therefore sought out Devāpi
in the forest and requested him to be the rājā. Devāpi again de-
clined but agreed to officiate as the priest in the sacrificial rituals
invoking rain.200
The ākhyāna highlights the rules of succession and the possible
combination of rājā and ṛṣi (king and seer). Devāpi as the “rain-
maker” ended the drought, a concept very central to high office in
lineage-based societies. This narrative occurs in a variety of later
texts but is altered to suit a changing context.201 That this story
comes to be called itihāsa is probably because of its association
with fundamental requirements of an earlier society.
The ākhyāna of Śunaḥśepa is also listed as nārāśaṃsī in some
texts, and was to be recited to the king by the hotṛ after the cere-
mony of anointing in the rājasūya sacrifice whilst both he and
the king were seated on golden seats—these were later given to the
priest.202 The purpose of the recitation was to ensure victory
as well as the birth of sons.
The story is as follows.203 Hariścandra, an Ikṣvāku rājā, was
without an heir and appealed to the gods for a son. Varuṇa granted
him a son but on condition that the son so born should be sacri-
ficed to him. On the birth of his son, Rohita, Hariścandra delayed
the sacrifice. Rohita meanwhile came upon a seer, Ajīgarta, an
Aṅgirasa brāhmaṇa, who because of extreme hunger was willing
to sell his middle son, Śunaḥśepa, to Rohita for a hundred head of
cattle. Rohita thus redeemed himself by handing over Śunaḥśepa
to Varuṇa and the sacrifice was prepared. Ajīgarta was asked
to bind his son to the stake, which he agreed to do for a further
199 10.98.
200 V.G. Rahurkar, “Devāpi and Śantanu in the Ṛg Veda”, 175ff.
201 Mahābhārata, 1.89.53, 1.90.46; Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 4.20.7ff.; Bhāgvata Purāṇa,
9.22.14–17.
202 Aitareya Brāhmaṇa, 7.13–18.
203 See also Śāṅkhāyana Śrautasūtra, 15.17–27.
132 The Past Before Us
hundred head of cattle, and to slaughter him for yet another equal
amount.
At this point, on the advice of the priest Viśvāmitra, Śunaḥśepa
prayed to the gods, and the prayer is largely of verses from the
Ṛgveda (suggesting them as a source).204 His prayers heard, the
bonds were released. Viśvāmitra refused to return him to Ajīgarta
and adopted him as his own son, appointing him to the status of
sreṣṭha (the best), and jyeṣṭha (the eldest). Śunaḥśepa agreed on
condition that the hundred sons of Viśvāmitra accept him as such.
The elder fifty being unwilling were promptly exiled to become
the ancestors of various peoples outside the social pale, such as the
Andhras, Pulindas, Śabaras, Puṇḍras, Mutibas, and many Dasyu
tribes. The younger fifty, who were addressed by Viśvāmitra as
gāthins, accepted Śunaḥśepa, who was given the name of Devarāta
and initiated into the sacred lore of the gāthins as well as overlord-
ship of the Jahnus—Viśvāmitra’s family.
The narrative of Śunaḥśepa relates the origin of clans. Viśvā-
mitra emerges as the powerful figure reordering the relationship
of Śunaḥśepa to the various persons in the story, demonstrating
the dependence of royal power on priestly power.205 In later
texts Viśvāmitra is described as a kṣatriya attempting to acquire
the status of a brāhmaṇa. Śunaḥśepa claims to be an Aṅgirasa
brāhmaṇa. Viśvāmitra performs the sacrifice as the hotṛ but is
complimented as being a bull of the Bharatas, a metaphor used
for kṣatriya heroes.
The narrative points to clans taking in outsiders as kinsmen
if they are found acceptable. The reactions of Viśvāmitra’s sons
reflect the conflict between those who are conscious of kinship
in relation to whatever is regarded as property, in this case access
to sacred lore, and those who are not. Those who do not accept
Śunaḥśepa are removed from kinship by being given the low status
of dasyus. The adoption of Śunaḥśepa requires that the entrant
be given a new name, indicating a change of identity, rights of
lineage in his overlordship of the Jahnus, and access to the secret
lore of the gāthins. All these features recur often in later times,
204 Ṛgveda, 1.24.
205 A.B. Keith, Ṛgvedic Brahmanas, 62ff.
Fragmentary Narratives from the Vedas 133
although reformulated somewhat. The historicity of the story is
in some ways irrelevant. Its significance lies in its encapsulating
a historical process—that of assimilation into a clan—central to
early society. In later times the story provided a precedent for the
induction of new groups into existing castes, and in that sense too
is part of itihāsa.
The reference to Śunaḥśepa as an Aṅgirasa would make him
a member of the priestly group associated with the Atharvaveda.
The name Śunaḥśepa (dog’s tail or penis), and those of his brothers
meaning the same, Śunaḥpucha and Śunaḥlāṅgala, and their patro-
nymic, Ājīgarti, suggest a very different identity from the one he
acquired as the son of the exalted Viśvāmitra. The intention of the
narrative might have been to explain the closeness of the Aṅgirasa
to kṣatriya interests, assuming that the Bhṛgvāṇgirasa brāhmaṇas
were the keepers of the kṣatriya tradition. The outcast sons in other
sources are referred to as the mleccha or impure people, with a
location outside the Ganges plain in western and central India and
the peninsula. Does the narrative record a split in the clans, with
some migrating and others accommodating themselves to change?
Or is it recording the presence of clans other than those accorded
status in Vedic sources? Was this a legend that was tagged on later
with its curious play on phallic names?206
Another narrative regarded as itihāsa was that of Purūravas and
Urvaśī,207 first referred to as a dialogue between the two in the
Ṛgveda.208 Purūravas is described as the son of the ancestress Ilā,
a deviation from the patriarchal norm of giving the father’s name
rather than that of the mother, the name being a personification
of the sacrificial oblation. Her son, a rājā, loved to distraction the
apsarā Urvaśī. She was banished to earth by the gandharvas, and
when Purūravas pleaded his love for her she agreed to live with
him provided that he would tend her two rams and ensure that
she never saw him naked. One night, the gandharvas stole one of
the rams and Purūravas ran after the thief, at which point there
was a flash of lightning and Urvaśī, seeing him naked, vanished.
206 J.C. Heesterman, The Ancient Indian Royal Consecration, 158ff.
207 Bṛhad-devatā, 7.147ff.
208 10.95.
134 The Past Before Us
Purūravas spent many years searching for her and eventually
found her. The hymn in the Ṛgveda encapsulates their dialogue:
he implores her to return, to which she agrees, but only to meet
him once in the year. This she does over the next five years and
consequently bears him five sons.
Interpretations of the legend are many.209 Max Müller saw it
as a nature myth with the dawn vanishing at the approach of the
sun.210 Another view is that Urvaśī is symbolic of matriarchal
cults dying under the patriarchy of the Aryans.211 This has led to
a further interpretation that the story records the marriage of an
Aryan male to a non-Aryan woman.212 The entry of the apsarā
could mark a break in succession, or a marriage alliance which
deviates from the norm. The association of an apsarā with trees
and water may be read as her being from the community of low-
status forest-dwellers; she was elevated when necessary and
described as an apsarā.
The legend is retold repeatedly in subsequent centuries in
various texts.213 It is a theme well known to mythology and paral-
lels the Greek myth of Cupid and Psyche, although the roles are
reversed.214 Yet it has an importance in the historical tradition
since Ilā and her son Purūravas are, as we shall see, said to have
founded one of the major lineages in the reconstructed version of
the past as given in the Purāṇas.
Parallel to the ākhyānas and the descent list of lineages was
209 J.C. Wright, “Purūravas and Urvaśī”, 526–47; R.P. Goldman, “Mortal
Man and Immortal Woman”, 273–303.
210 Chips from a German Workshop, vol. I, 98ff.
211 D.D. Kosambi, “Urvaśī and Purūravas”, in idem, Myth and Reality,
42–81.
212 R.C. Gaur, “The Legend of Purūravas and Urvaśī: An Interpretation”,
142ff.
213 M. Winternitz, History of Indian Literature, 91ff.
214 In the Greek myth, Psyche was a mortal, and Cupid, the son of Venus,
falls in love with her. He visits her after dark and leaves before dawn, which
has her puzzled. Urged by the curiosity of her sisters, she attempts to see him
by lamplight, whereupon a drop of oil falls on Cupid, who awakes and disap-
pears. The distraught Psyche performs many tasks for Venus, including a visit
to Hades, in the hope of winning back Cupid. Eventually this is achieved by
Psyche joining him as an immortal.
Fragmentary Narratives from the Vedas 135
002
0
sertemoliK
seitsanyD
dna
,snalC
,secalP
tnatropmI
eroM
eht
fo
snoitacoL
:1
paM
E
G
N
Ganga
A
R
A
Y noS
A
L
A e g
M n
K a r
a k o
r a m
R E
Ind
A
us
T
H
Beas
I G
Ya
a
m
ng
u
a
na labm ahC
a R
a y h
d n iV
h
s
u
K
G
Kabul
mulehJ
banehC
ivaR
jeltuS
arkaH adam
raN
Tapi
u
d
egnaR
nam
ia
n lu
S
i H
sudnI
dnamleH
TAWS
AJOBMAK
LUBAK
ARĀHDNAG URUP
ITIAVXARAH
ayīpūyiraH
URUK
IHLED
ALĀCÑAP
AHEDIV
ALASOK
ībmāśuaK
AHDAGAM
ATAKLOK
idanāhaM
3
retpahC
,1
paM
136 The Past Before Us
the succession of teachers recorded in the Upaniṣads. These
texts incorporate, for the first time, the vaṃśas (succession lists)
of those regarded as important brāhmaṇa teachers.215 Such lists
in the Upaniṣads may well have been required, apart from other
reasons, because of the questioning of the Vedas by heterodox
sects.216 Ancestry is frequently traced back to a deity which sets
the brāhmaṇas apart and underlines their status, as well as that
of their teachings, as more ancient than the rest and therefore
superior. There are also succession lists of ṛṣis.217 The same
mechanism for asserting status was to be used later in kṣatriya
genealogies. The Upaniṣads do not list familial descent, as was
done in the kṣatriya tradition, but they list the lineal succession
of teachers. Interestingly, in one of the brāhmaṇa vaṃśas, the first
forty-two teachers out of the total of fifty-eight are listed as sons
of their mother.218
7. Narratives of Migration and Settlement
Space and time are the two dimensions of history that focus on
“where” and “when”. They are not absent in these texts. They
are organized in various ways, through accounts of migrations,
settlements, and the spaces occupied by ritual activity. These
define relations between categories of people, indicating that
which binds them and that which separates. Rituals are occasions
for the collectivity to come together and to identify itself either
through participation or exclusion. Yet the space so demarcated
had a temporary sanctity since public rituals were not required
to be performed in the same location each time—settlements had
a greater permanency as markers of space—but rituals also in-
corporated ways of measuring time.
215 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 10.6.5.9; Max Müller, A History of Ancient Sans-
krit Literature, 229ff.; U.N. Ghoshal, Studies in Indian History and Culture, 2;
idem, The Beginnings of Historiography and Other Essays; Jaiminīya Upaniṣad
Brāhmaṇa, 3.40–2, 4.16–17.
216 Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad, 2.6.1–3.
217 Āśvalāyana Gṛhya Sūtra, 3.4.1–5; P.V. Kane, History of Dharmasastra,
vol. II, 690ff.
218 Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad, 4.6.1.
Fragmentary Narratives from the Vedas 137
Settlements were given to fission or breaking away if demo-
graphic imbalances or confrontations required diffusion. In this
process new settlements, in imitation of earlier ones, would be
established in adjoining territory. Confederation and fission were
mechanisms of reducing aggression. Major conflicts are often
located on rivers, understandably so, given the need to control
water resources. In some cases it is possible to trace the migration
of clans by comparing their locations in the Ṛgveda with references
to locations in the later sections of the Vedic corpus.219
The Pūrus, originally located in the Suvastu/Swat valley in
the north-west, became part of the large Kuru tribe linked to the
Pañcāla in the western Ganges plain. The Bharatas on the Paruṣṇī
(Ravi) river move to the Vipāś and Śutudrī (Beas and Sutlej) riv-
ers, and finally to the western Ganges plain, again as part of the
Kuru tribe. Some clans opposed to each other in the dāśarājña
were unified a few centuries later. Despite Pūru’s language being
harsh and incorrect, the language of the Kuru-Pañcāla is now
said to be the best and they observe the required Vedic rituals—
although earlier they were said to be ayajyavāḥ (not performing
the required rituals).220 The Kurus are often mentioned as the
most eminent among the clans, the pace-setters of the culture that
had now emerged.
There is by now the much-quoted story of Māthava the Videgha
going from the region of the Sarasvatī in the Indo-Gangetic water-
shed all the way across to the Sadānīrā river (generally identified
with the modern Gandaka). He carried Agni in his mouth and was
accompanied by his purohita, Gautama Rāhugaṇa, who was an
Aṅgirasa. The land was uncultivated and marshy. He crossed the
river when the land on the other bank had been purified by Agni
and established himself to the east of it, whence the name Videha,
derived from Videgha.221 The presence of Agni could refer to
both the purification of the land through sacrificial rituals as well
as the clearing of the land by fire, in this case the forests of the
foothills. There is a reference to brāhmaṇas who had now settled
around the Sadānīrā. It is said that, at the time when the sacrifice
219 Ṛgveda, 3.23.4; Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 13.5.4.11ff.
220 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 3.2.3.15, 1.7.2.8, 5.2.3.5.
221 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 1.4.1.14ff.
138 The Past Before Us
was begun, Agni issued forth from the mouth of Videgha Māthava.
This could be a way of saying that this migration brought both the
ritual of sacrifice as well as the Indo-Aryan language to a region
earlier unfamiliar with both.
This is the region which in later centuries came to be associated
with the Ikṣvāku lineage. There is a single reference in the Ṛgveda
to Ikṣvāku as a rājā,222 and the Atharvaveda refers to him as an
ancient hero. Rāma is part of the name of some teachers listed in
the Brāhmaṇas. Janaka as the rājā of Videha is known to the same
texts.223 This migration and subsequent settlement is a prototype
story in the narratives of later times.
Tentative efforts at narrating origins and giving an initial form
to the past comes from the intriguing story of the Flood first told
in the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa.224 This was elaborated upon in later
texts, with some changes to become the starting point of the
itihāsa-purāṇa tradition in the Purāṇas.
The earliest version relates briefly that Manu, generally de-
scribed as the first man, the patriarch—the word itself being
linked to mānava, meaning mankind—performing his morning
ablutions, found a fish in his cupped hands and reared it until it
reached an enormous size. Growing larger, it had to be changed
from a jar to a tank to the sea. It divulged the intention of the gods
to drown the earth in a deluge for no apparent reason. Wishing to
save Manu from this disaster it ordered him to build a boat which,
when the flood came, was tied to its horn. It then swam through
the waters and lodged the boat on a northern mountain. From
here Manu returned when the waters subsided. Being alone and
desirous of sons he performed a sacrifice from which a daughter
was born, whom he significantly named, Idā /Ilā, literally a liba-
tion or a sacrificial food offering. Through her in turn were born
his descendants.
Of all the multiplicity of Flood stories from various parts of
the world, this version most closely parallels the story in earlier
Mesopotamian texts, and is elaborated in the Purāṇas.
222 Ṛgveda, 10.60.4.
223 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 11.3.1.2ff.; Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad, 3.1.1; 4.1.1;
4.4.7; 5.14.8.
224 1.8.1.1–10.
Fragmentary Narratives from the Vedas 139
8. Early Concepts of Time
Descriptions of creation included references to concepts of time.225
Time is the progenitor of creation, beginning with the day and
the night, counting to the year, and requiring the existence of the
sun and the moon.226 The calendar measures time. In some later
texts kāla (time) is said to control the universe. The span was the
yuga, initially calculated as a five-year period, although this did
not preclude a longer span. Five is a significant number linked to
the five seasons, five directions, five deities, five peoples.227 The
computation of time was not as yet a central concern to the pattern
of the past. This was to come later.
The theory of the four yugas, as demarcated periods of time and
visualized as cycles of time, is not mentioned. What were to be-
come the labels of the four yugas in post-Vedic texts—Kṛta, Tretā,
Dvāpara, Kali—are mentioned, but as throws of dice (akṣa). The
alternative name for Kali referred to the single dot on the dice.228
There is a hint here of chance being associated with time. Spans
longer than the yuga were said to be periods of a hundred years
and multiples of this. In the absence of cycles of time, the idea of
the repetition of events was unknown.
Creation is attributed to Indra, to the separation of earth and
sky, to primeval Man—puruṣasūkta, to the golden embryo, hiraṇ-
yagarbha.229 It is also said that Time begets heaven and earth.230
The reiteration of the centrality of time comes about through the
performance of seasonal rituals. This emerges from a luni-solar
calendar, the notion of a cyclic return each year. Mention is made
of the figure 360 in a riddle, as well as what has been interpreted
as a twelve-month year with an intercalary month. However, it
was essentially also observing a linear reckoning. This coincided
with the more frequent domestic rituals involving the listing of
tithis/days, the new and full moon which was to become the basis
225 Ṛgveda, 10.129, 10.130, 10.190.
226 Ṛgveda, 10.190.
227 Taittirīya Saṃhitā, 4.3.3.
228 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 5.4.4.6; Atharvaveda, 7.114.1, 7.52.
229 L.Gonzales-Reiman, “Cosmic Cycles, Cosmology and Cosmography”,
411–28.
230 Atharvaveda, 19.53.5–6.
140 The Past Before Us
of the pakṣa or fortnight—of which two constituted a māsa/month;
cāturmāsa were the three four-monthly seasons; and larger periods
were changes in the position of the sun such as the uttarāyana and
the dakṣiṇāyana. This interplay was of lunar and solar measure-
ments as well as linear and cyclic notions of time. These were to
remain a continuing feature.
9. In Sum
The dāna-stutis, gāthās, and nārāśaṃsīs can be viewed as frag-
ments of a tradition, similar to the epic, claiming some semblance
to persons and events. The ākhyāna provided the possibility that
the legend could be used, as indeed it was, as a precedent for other
times and other contexts. Its close association with the itihāsa and
the purāṇa is reiterated in the pāriplava cycle where, in the ten-
day cycle of ākhyānas, the eighth day is reserved for itihāsa and
the ninth for purāṇa.231
Over time the conjoint itihāsa-purāṇa referred to an all-
enveloping category, delineating specific texts. It was important
enough to be part of the ritual compendium but was also associ-
ated with the Kaṇvas and Bhṛgvāṅgiras, and later the sūta and
māgadha, who may have been distanced from the orthodox. Ini-
tially, the heroic act is at a premium, but this is gradually modified
by the focus shifting to yajñas. However, the expected gift always
has primacy.
The fragments narrated here are but a few examples. As mes-
sages relating to the past they require to be interpreted both by
their authors and by their audience.232 The significance of the
past was recognized by clan societies, but the ordering of the
past as history was not a requirement. Nevertheless, elements
of what eventually went into the making of a historical tradition
were woven into what was projected as the past in the literature
of these early societies.
Ritual becomes an avenue of indicating the presence of the past
and for ordering the present. What is sought to be recorded and
remembered from the past is the power of those who conducted
231 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 13.4.3.2ff.; Taittirīya Āraṇyaka, 2.10.
232 D.P. Henige, Oral Tradition and History, 194.
Fragmentary Narratives from the Vedas 141
raids to enhance wealth and were later patrons of the sacrifice,
and those who performed rituals for the patrons. The attempt was
to suggest a continuing identity of power among some clans from
earlier to later times, irrespective of whether this was actually
so. Those that endorsed these claims could not be part of the same
identity, and the separation of the kṣatriya from the brāhmaṇa
facilitated the brāhmaṇa’s endorsement of the kṣatriya, even if
it increased the latter’s dependence on the former. The rituals
focused on the kṣatriya, the access of the vaiśya was limited, the
śūdra was excluded. Kavaṣa Ailūṣa was the son of a dāsī, there-
fore he was expelled from the ritual and was only invited back to
conduct the ritual when it was discovered that he was favoured
by the gods.233
It has been argued by some scholars that the stories of kṣatriya
heroes and their patronage were originally gathered as a kind
of kṣatriya tradition distinct from the brahmanical, with texts
possibly composed in Prākrit.234 This version was then rendered
into Sanskrit and portions of it entered the Vedas, the epics, and
the genealogical section of the Purāṇas. Others hold that Prākrit
and Apabhraṃśa were always second-order languages.235 Since
the popular use of Sanskrit in inscriptions, for example, is late, it
is likely that the earlier common languages consisted of various
regional Prākrits (as in the Aśokan inscriptions). Sanskrit may
well have been the ritual language. In that case it is likely that
the kṣatriya tradition would have been kept by the Bhṛgus, who
could be described as brahma-kṣatra and the sūtas, who were
not brāhmaṇas, but the former had access to the compiling of
the Vedas. This may explain the initial authorship of the itihāsa
tradition.
The Vedic corpus includes various forms of narratives, a few of
which can be regarded as seminal to the idea of historical tradition.
Whatever the genesis of these narratives, their eventual attribution,
when they were included in the Vedas, was to brāhmaṇa authors.
What is curious is that these authors were not always impeccable
233 Aitareya Brāhmaṇa, 2.19.
234 F.E. Pargiter, The Purana Text of the Dynasties of the Kali Age, x.
235 S. Pollock, The Languge of the Gods in the World of Men, 104.
142 The Past Before Us
brāhmaṇas with unquestionable credentials. It is almost as if the
itihāsa-purāṇa tradition was regarded as a trifle alien. That it
could not be ignored or superseded is evident from its incorpora-
tion. Was the itihāsa-purāṇa tradition initially a non-brahmanical
tradition that was gradually appropriated by the brāhmaṇas, or
did the authors of the tradition use their access to this knowledge
about the past and its political potential in contemporary affairs
to work their way into the main tradition? This might explain
why the authors of the itihāsa-purāṇa tradition sought links with
rituals until such time as ritual moorings became unnecessary to
asserting control over the tradition.
Such questions have been asked in earlier times. Yāska, for
instance, refers to aitihāsikas and nairuktas (etymologists and
commentators).236 The former were those who maintained that
many of the itihāsas that are narrated in the Vedic corpus had
a historicity, but they were opposed by the nairuktas, such as
Skandāsvamin, who insisted that the itihāsas had to be interpreted
figuratively. For the orthodox the Vedas are revealed, and therefore
need have no elements of historicity. That this was debated in those
times points to seminal concerns about historical consciousness.
That these compositions can be regarded as embedded history is
suggested by a few features that, though by no means conclusive,
are nevertheless indicative. The continuity from the past to the
present lay in eulogizing the heroes, initially for their success in
acquiring booty and in later times for their generous patronage of
sacrificial rituals, both activities becoming agencies not only for
gift-giving, which was the ostensible reason for the compositions,
but also for remembering the heroes and their actions. The later
composers were familiar with the earlier references but were also
aware of the changed contemporary context. Elaborate sacrificial
rituals were added to cattle-raids as occasions for eulogies and
gift-giving. The earlier context, in a sense, legitimized the later,
since the later drew upon the earlier. The legitimacy was based
on events that were believed to have been historical.
Narratives in elementary forms which encouraged a familiarity
with the past are embedded in the Vedic corpus and claim to refer
236 Nirukta of Yāska, 2.16, 12.1, 4.6, 6.11, 12.10.
Fragmentary Narratives from the Vedas 143
to what happened in contemporary and in past times. These forms
and their narratives, however fragmentary, did contribute towards
a perception of the past, particularly later when they were incorpo-
rated into more recognizably historical texts, even if by then they
had undergone a change. Some themes, occasionally altered, are
repeated in later texts. Seminal ideas of what constitutes a narra-
tive about the past, and which is not thought of as fictitious, and
the need to maintain such a tradition—all of which suggest a his-
torical consciousness—are contained in some of these fragments.
The dāna-stuti hymns were in many ways seminal to the praśasti
sections of the later inscriptions. The historicity of the narrative
continues to be uncertain, but the fragmentary components of a
historically oriented perception of the past becomes evident.
4
The Mahābhārata
1. Creating the Epic
Epics, when not composed as a formal literary genre, carry
by their very nature an element of embedded history. These
are not histories per se, but they incorporate fragments of
narratives pertaining to what was believed to have happened.
Initially, and thereafter for some time, they are often oral compo­
sitions, until they are collated and connected through a narrative.
They therefore tend to be compositions later in time from the
events described, among their functions being the recalling and
reconstruction of earlier events. There is in their evocation of the
heroic glories of earlier times an almost nostalgic view of the past.
Neither the events nor the personalities are necessarily historical;
nevertheless, the assumptions of an earlier society are evident in
them. In part this is due to the gradual evolution of the different
forms within what we call the epic genre: the epos, the narrative
prior to the epic form; the panegyric, the eulogy of a person who
may not be present; and the epic, with the layered meanings of
its narrative.1
The Mahābhārata and the Rāmāyaṇa are described as epics;
insofar as the term suggests the work of a single author, this is a
1 N. Frye, Anatomy of Criticism, 113. See also B.K. Lewalski, Milton’s Para-
dise Lost and the Rhetoric of Literary Forms, 9–11; idem, Renaissance Genres:
Essays in Theory, History and Interpretation; R.L. Colie, The Resources of Kind:
Genre-theory in the Renaissance.
The Mahābhārata 145
misnomer for both carry later interpolations, some small and some
quite substantial.2 These interpolations emerge from a changing
present that seeks sanction from the past, and therefore presents it
differently from the way it may have been presented earlier. To that
extent they offer evidence of the existence of a historical sense.
Historical consciousness in these epics is expressed in the re­
presentation of two socio­political forms: a society of past times
and the society of the present—although the earlier in some places
survives as parallel to the later. The two are not starkly distinct,
there is considerable fluidity between them. Nevertheless, the dif­
ference is recognizable. The historicity of event and person may
therefore be less important than the portrayal of the bigger change.
The juxtaposition is of lineage­based societies and chiefships of
earlier times with the incipient kingdoms of later times. Mutation
from one to the other provides a historical flavour. The perception
of this juxtaposition—which is from a later age looking back on
the earlier—is part of the representation of the past.
In the Mahābhārata this dichotomy is graduated. But it is ap­
parent from what have been called the narrative sections, which
assume a background of clan societies, and which differ somewhat
from the later didactic interpolations holding forth on the merits
of kingship.3 The Rāmāyaṇa treats this dichotomy differently and
there is, as will be seen later, a confrontation between the two woven
into the story itself. This recognition of difference may be seen
as a perception of historical change, as well as awareness that the
juxtaposition of the two is an attempt at constructing the past in a
particular way. The transition, in a sense, becomes the historical
perception.
The origins of epic poetry have been traced to the dāna-stuti
hymns, gāthās, nārāśaṃsīs, and ākhyānas of the Vedic corpus.
Events centre on the lives of rājās. Fragments were probably brought
together, juxtaposed, and interleaved. This is suggested by the
retelling of familiar narratives from earlier times, or by the men­
2 Some scholars argue for the texts having been composed at a particular point
in time without later additions. Discrepancies and contradictions weaken this
argument. It is difficult to believe that a text as lengthy, diverse, and complicated
as the Mahābhārata was composed at one point in time.
3 R. Thapar, “The Historian and the Epic”, in idem, Cultural Pasts, 613–29.
146 The Past Before Us
tion elsewhere of narratives included in the epic, such as those
of Yayāti, or the birth of Bharata,4 and by a comparison of these
with Buddhist and Jaina versions. The retellings carry changes.
Sixteen rājās of earlier times are listed in the later sections of the
epic, but of these only six are referred to in the Vedic corpus.5
The rest, including Rāma and the Pāṇḍavas, must have come from
other traditions. Described as powerful samrāṭs and cakravartins,
they reflect the later images of kings. There is passing mention
of the Kauravas in the sūtra literature,6 but there is no mention
of the Pāṇḍavas, although a cattle-wealthy rājā, Janamejaya
Pārikṣita, was famous for performing an aśvamedha.7 It has been
suggested that the Pāṇḍava narrative could originally have been
independent but was later knitted into the epic.8 Pāṇini, in the
fourth century bc, mentions the Kuru territory, Kuntī, Yudhiṣṭhira,
and the Mahābhārata.9
Such narratives emanate from two kinds of situations: they
were recited at the yajñas, where the ritual is central; or when
bards recited hero­lauds in the sabhās (the assembly halls) of clan
chiefs, and where the focus was on the hero. The Mahābhārata
was recited initially at ritual occasions; nevertheless the focus is
on the heroes.
The early groping towards what eventually went into the mak­
ing of a historical tradition is embedded in the Mahābhārata and
the Rāmāyaṇa. The former is referred to more often as itihāsa,
although also described as ākhyāna, as well as the fifth Veda or
Kṛṣṇa Veda—that of Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana Vyāsa, the compiler.
Itihāsa is smṛti or remembered tradition—and not śruti or rev­
elation, as are the Vedas—therefore calling the Mahābhārata the
fifth Veda is somewhat problematic. The Rāmāyaṇa is referred to
more often as kāvya (poem), or even ādi-kāvya (the first poem).
Both texts grew out of narrating stories, the kathā, and in their
4 H. Winternitz, History of Indian Literature, 279ff., 378ff.
5 The story of Rāma is told as representing courage in distress: Mahābhārata,
3.258–75.
6 Śāṇkhāyana Śrautasūtra, 15.17–27.
7 Aitareya Brāhmaṇa, 4.27, 7.34, 8.21; Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 13.5.4.1–3.
8 J.L. Fitzgerald, “No Contest between Memory and Invention”.
9 Aṣṭādhyāyī of Pāṇini, 4.1.172, 6.2.42, 6.2.38, 8.3.95, 4.1.176.
The Mahābhārata 147
earliest and shorter forms were referred to as the Bhārata and the
Rāma-kathā.10
The early forms of both texts could have been part of the oral
tradition, recited and preserved by bards. The Mahābhārata may
subsequently have been compiled and composed in literary form
by Vyāsa/Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana, and other compilers (if Vyāsa was
their generic name). It has been argued that this text was redacted
by Bhṛgu brāhmaṇas, but this view is not universally accepted,
there being many views on its composition and authorship.11
My argument draws on the epic having undergone three phases of
change—the original oral composition was given a literary render­
ing by Vyāsa, subsequent to which were added the interpolations
by later redactors, probably the Bhṛgus. This last phase propagated
kingship and the worship of Viṣṇu.
The epics are revered by some but regarded with contempt by
others. Buddhist commentaries refer to them as nirarthakathā
(meaningless narrative) and state that places where they are recited
are not to be visited.12 Floating bardic fragments appear as sto­
ries in the Jātaka literature and in Jaina narratives. The Buddhist
Jātaka stories, probably compiled in about the second century bc
and incorporating earlier verse sections, show some familiarity
with the protagonists of the epic,13 but with less empathy—and
the stories differ.
The Jaina versions brought some fragments together in the
10 J. Brockington, The Sanskrit Epics; idem, “Issues Involved in the Shift
from Oral to Written Transmission of the Epics: A Workshop Report”, 131–8;
Y. Vassilkov, “The Mahabharata’s Typological Definition Reconsidered”,
249–56.
11 V.S. Sukthankar, “Prolegomena”, in the Ādiparvan, Mahābhārata, vol. 1,
i–cx; idem, “The Bhṛgus and the Bhārata: A Text-Historical Study”, 1–76; idem,
On the Meaning of the Mahābhārata: these have argued for the Bhṛgu redaction,
but others disagree, e.g. A. Hiltebeitel, Rethinking the Mahābhārata; M. Biardeau,
“The Salvation of the King in the Mahābhārata”, 75–97. See also R.P. Goldman,
Gods, Priests and Warriors: The Bhṛgus of the Mahābhārata; J.L. Fitzgerald,
Introduction to The Book of Peace in The Mahābhārata, vol. 7, 79–164.
12 Sammoha-Vinodini, 490, as quoted in G.P. Malalasekera, Dictionary of
Pali Proper Names, vol. 1, 372.
13 Jātakas: Dhūmakāri Jātaka 413; Dasa-brāhmaṇa Jātaka 495; Kunāla
Jātaka 536.
148 The Past Before Us
Pāṇḍava Purāṇa, and in an eighth­century ad work, the Harivaṃśa
Purāṇa of Jinasena.14 But even these are variants and differ
in characterization, events, and intentions. They introduce the
Mathura legends of Kṛṣṇa. The war is attributed to Jarāsandha
seeking revenge on Kṛṣṇa, who had killed his son-in-law. It has
been said that the Jaina Purāṇas are an intentional rewriting of
the brahmanical Purānas.15 Jarāsandha is in them the valorous
adversary of Kṛṣṇa, and the heroes eventually seek liberation
through renunciation, demonstrating the centrality of Jaina ethics.
Creating an acceptable version was the task of the compiler, even
if it meant discarding the variants. Vyāsa’s attempt was presumably
to cull and refashion the events into a retrievable whole, and to
underline brahmanical ethics.
Some of the important persons in the epic, barring the Pāṇḍavas,
find mention in the Vedas, but often in passing and linked with
other locations and events. The Bharatas moved from the Ravi to
the Sutlej–Beas rivers, and may then have moved into the Doab,
where there could have been a conflict with existing settlements.
A possible genesis of the epic in the dāśrājña, the conflict of the
ten rājās described in the Ṛgveda, has been suggested.16 Stories
about the earlier conflict may have survived, been exaggerated and
a local conflict could have been enlarged into a war. Alliances and
identities would have taken other shapes in the course of stories
going from the Ṛgveda via the Brāhmaṇas to the epic. The loca­
tions of the battle would change with migrations.
An oral tradition meant that the story could be added to or sub­
tracted from through various renderings. The text was not frozen
until it was written, and even then it could be added to.17 The oldest
core, according to one opinion, may have been that composed in
the triṣṭubh metre.18 Subsequent emendations and interpolations
14 B.N. Sumitra Bai and R.J. Zydenbos, “The Jaina Mahabharata”, 251ff.
15 P. Jaini, “Jaina Puranas: A Puranic Counter Tradition”, 207–46.
16 Ṛgveda, 7.18; M. Witzel, “The Vedas and the Epics: Some Comparative
Notes on Persons, Lineages, Geography and Grammar”, 21–80; S.S.N. Murthy,
“The Questionable Historicity of the Mahābhārata”, 1–15.
17 V.S. Sukthankar, On the Meaning of the Mahābhārata; I. Morris, “The Use
and Abuse of Homer”, 81–138.
18 M.C. Smith, “The Mahābhārata’s Core”, 479–82.
The Mahābhārata 149
would have continued for a few centuries, as is characteristic of
open oral traditions. The preservation of these texts was therefore
very different from the more meticulous memorization of the ritual
compositions of the Vedic hymns, virtually a closed oral tradition.
Memorization is not the key factor in an oral composition since
there can be improvisation in the course of a recital.19
It has been argued that societies with a lively oral tradition
live in the present and slough off those bits of the past which are
irrelevant. Oral literature is therefore heavily dependent on its im­
mediate social context.20 Updating the context of the story would
explain the presence of peoples contemporary with the updat­
ers, such as the Yavanas, Śakas, and Hūṇas of the post-Mauryan
period, the retaining of what they viewed as pertinent, introducing
an element of historical consciousness. Irrespective of whether
what is described is factual or not, there is a sense of the past,
and of carrying a tradition of information on the past which is of
significance to later reconstructions of the past. Most oral epics,
as noted earlier, take a written form much after the events they are
narrating, and this turning to the past has to do with marshalling
the past for the purposes of the present—a feature even of some
modern historical writing.
The epic tradition can be consciously archaic, given that heroic
poetry reminds its audience of deeds that are assumed to have
happened in an earlier “heroic age”. It is a narrative focussing
on individuals, generally members of the elite patriline, with an
emphasis on martial values,21 and where heroism becomes a social
necessity.22 The conflict is frequently between such societies and
those less well configured and seen as alien, as in the Rāmāyaṇa;
or between fairly equally matched families for political supremacy,
19 R. Finnegan, Oral Poetry, 52; A. Parry (ed.), The Making of Homeric Verse:
The Collected Papers of Milman Parry; A.B. Lord, The Singer of Tales. There
is a discussion on the validity of the views of Parry and Lord in relation to the
oral forms in the Indian epics in W. de Jong, “Recent Russian Publications on
the Indian Epic”, 1–42.
20 R. Finnegan, Oral Poetry; W.J. Ong, Orality and Literacy.
21 G. Thomson, Studies in Ancient Greek Society, 527ff.; S.P. Brodbeck, The
Mahābhārata Patriline.
22 J. Redfield, Nature and Culture in the Iliad: The Tragedy of Hector, 99ff.
150 The Past Before Us
as in the Mahābhārata; and alongside there is a grappling with the
problems of historical change. Are the chiefdoms of the Mahā-
bhārata, which possibly date to the early first millennium bc,
fearful of the socio­political change inherent in the transition to
kingdoms, which they begin to glimpse in the Magadhan kingship
of the mid-first millennium bc?
Epic literature traces origins and provides data for the recog­
nition of beginnings. To that extent, lineages and the origins of
social groups are of substantial interest. This is expressed in the
use of the symbols of a warrior aristocracy and the delineation of
a world imbued with its values; a universe where status and birth
are seemingly synonymous yet also negotiable through legends;
where the purity of lineage is important enough for some heroes
to be fathered by the gods, but where this purity can also be fab­
ricated through a genealogy; where legitimacy is crucial to the
claim to political power, but the latter precedes the former; where
the resolution of problems is often through conflict; and where
ordinary people, with some exceptions, are not involved in the
events other than at subservient levels.
Myth is sometimes differentiated from epic: myth evokes the
remote past and deals with the origin, nature, and destiny of the
cosmos and in it the deities have functions; an epic on the other
hand evokes the more recent past with a specific time and place,
and deals with the origins, nature, and destiny of man, and heroes
are role models.23 Immortalizing the current hero would also be
of benefit to the bard, who anticipates lavish gifts from the hero,
as earlier in the dāna-stuti hymns. Questions of origins and iden­
tity are pertinent to the roots of the community and can become
the reason for the sanction which lies behind the necessity of the
transmission. The difference between the remote and recent past
is also significant to notions of time.
2. The Narrative
The Mahābhārata as we have it now is of enormous length and
consists of eighteen parvans (books).24 Some constituted the core
23 A. Hiltebeitel, The Ritual of Battle, 31–2.
24 V.S. Sukthankar, S.K. Belvalkar, and P.L.Vaidya, et al., The Mahābhārata,
The Mahābhārata 151
story as narrated in the Ādi parvan (1), and Sabhā parvan (2),
and the descriptions of the battle in later parvans; some were the
encasing of this story in a variety of discourses on polity, social
codes, rebirth, and such like, as given in the Śānti parvan (12) and
Anuśāsana parvan (13). It is thought the latter two and the early
part of the Ādi parvan are additions of a later period. Such inter­
polations occur elsewhere in the parvans as well, but not always
at such great length. The epic refers to itself as the fifth Veda and
is referred to as such in other texts.25
The core of the epic is a family feud over control of territory and
resources. The epic narrative is in part a continuation of actions
pertaining to societies as described in the Vedas, and in part the
induction of other clans and customs alien and subsequent to the
Vedas. It is, overall, an attempt at the reconstruction of some of
the believed history of the clans. It focuses on the descendants of
Ilā/Iḍā, the hermaphrodite child of Manu, constituting one of the
two major lineages of kṣatriyas, the ruling clans in clan societies.
(In later times this was to be called the Candravaṃśa or Lunar
lineage; the other being the Sūryavaṃśa or Solar lineage. The
Mahābhārata narrative revolves around the first and the Rāmāyaṇa
story figures as the second.)
The central narrative involves the Kauravas and Pāṇḍavas,
cousins who are descendants of Pūru. Their identification as
Bharatas may have been intended to link them with the Bharatas
of the Ṛgveda. The cousins confront each other in a war which,
it is said, exterminated the kṣatriya clans. Associated with the
Pāṇḍavas is Kṛṣṇa of the Vṛṣṇi clan, descended from Yadu; Kṛṣṇa
is eventually projected as an incarnation of Viṣṇu. The lineages are
not mentioned as such in the Vedic corpus, but the names of clans
and persons exist in scattered references. The descent groups could
be inventions, as doubtless some were. However, the more impor­
tant ones feature in narratives in Buddhist and Jaina texts as well,
For the First Time Critically Edited, 19 vols; translation of parvans 1–5, of the
Critical Edition, J.A.B. van Buitenen (ed. and trans.), The Mahābhārata, Chicago,
1973, 11, 12 (i), J.L. Fitzgerald, 2004.
25 J.L. Fitzgerald, “India’s Fifth Veda. The Mahābhārata’s Presentation of
Itself”, 251–73. See also D.D. Kosambi, “The Autochthonous Element in the
Mahābhārata”, 31–44.
152 The Past Before Us
although the stories differ, as do the worldviews. This suggests a
common source of stories—but not necessarily historicity.
The narrative of the family feud in the Mahābhārata begins
with Śantanu marrying Gaṅgā, who unfortunately for him does
away with each of her children at birth. Only one son, Bhīṣma, is
rescued, after which the mother disappears. Later, Śantanu mar­
ries Satyavatī, who demands that Bhīṣma remain celibate so that
her sons succeed Śantanu. Bhīṣma agrees, but nevertheless he
is referred to as pitāmaha—paternal grandfather, the respected
patriarch.
The sons of Satyavatī die childless, two widows surviving them.
The crisis of succession requires that the two submit to bearing
a son each from Vyāsa, himself the illegitimate son of Satyavatī
born through a liaison with the ṛṣi Parāśara, prior to her marrying
Śantanu. The two step-brothers, Dhṛtrāṣṭra and Pāṇḍu—the sons
of Vyāsa by the two widows—are therefore born out of wedlock,
although the fathering of the two boys has been explained as a
form of niyoga or levirate.26
Vyāsa is an affinal kinsman and has no blood connection
with the lineages, nor have the widows. Neither of the two sons
can succeed since the first is born blind and the second has an
abnormally pale skin and is possibly an albino. Physical defects
are a disqualification for the status of rājā, an echo of the story
of Devāpi. Ironically, the only child with no physical defects is
the one fathered by Vyāsa on a dāsī, and therefore ineligible on
grounds of status. Vyāsa’s mother, Satyavatī, is the paternal great-
grandmother to the heroes of the epic, but neither she nor the father
of Vyāsa is part of the lineage of the Pūrus. Dhṛtrāṣṭra is father to
the Kauravas, and Pāṇḍu gives his name to his five sons, although
they are not born of him: he is unable to father children because
of a curse. The two sets of cousins are not related by blood to the
Pūru lineage. Nevertheless, Bhīṣma ensures a succession against
26 1.97.7ff. (In this chapter, numbers without reference to a text pertain to the
Mahābhārata.) There is a difference of opinion in the Dharmaśāstras regard­
ing the rules of levirate. Manu’s Code of Law, 9.57, states that an older brother
cannot cohabit with a younger brother’s widow but Gautama Dharmasūtra,
18.4–8, and Viṣṇu Dharmasūtra, 15.3, allow it. In this case Vyāsa was the elder
stepbrother.
The Mahābhārata 153
heavy odds and insists on it. One wonders why there should have
been such insistence. Was the story of paternity through Vyāsa an
attempt to veil the real pitāmaha? If the latter was Bhīṣma, there
would have been a continuation of the blood­line.
The birth of the Kauravas and the Pāṇḍavas is also abnormal.
The Kauravas, numbering a hundred brothers, emerged as a ball
of flesh from their mother Gāndhārī’s womb, which ball was
then divided into a hundred pieces, and each placed in a jar; the
Pāṇḍavas were fathered by various deities, called up by a formula
given to Kuntī, the wife of Pāṇḍu. Kuntī’s first son, Karṇa, was
the child of Sūrya the sun-god, but being born out of wedlock was
never given the status of a kṣatriya or of a Pāṇḍava, although in fact
he was in no way inferior to the rest. He grew up in the family of a
sūta—a bard or a charioteer—and became an ally of the Kauravas.
Kuntī bore three sons from three different gods and passed the
formula onto her co-wife Mādrī, who called up the twin-gods, the
Aśvins, and bore twin sons. Some have explained Kuntī’s actions
also as a resort to niyoga (levirate), but none of the gods so called
upon were kinsmen and Kuntī herself does not acknowledge it as
niyoga.27 The twin sons have no blood relationship with the three
older brothers but are regarded as related.
From the perspective of a society underlining kinship con­
nections, as was this society, the lapses in the connections are
quite striking. They are ignored in favour of political claims. The
annulling of kinship as actual identity hints at a proto­caste iden­
tity, since they all claim to be kṣatriyas.
On the death of Pāṇḍu, his five young sons go to the residence
of their uncle at Hastināpura and are brought up with his hundred
sons. The eldest among the latter, Duryodhana, is determined that
he should inherit the entire patrimony. He lays various plans to kill
the Pāṇḍavas: these plans and their consequences fill out the early
part of the epic narrative. The five Pāṇḍava brothers, together with
the matriarch Kuntī, have to go into hiding for a year. During this
period they attend, in disguise, the svayamvara of Draupadī, the
daughter of the rājā of Pañcāla, and win her. She becomes the
joint wife of the five brothers—an act of fraternal polyandry.
27 1.112.2ff.; 113.30.
154 The Past Before Us
They return to Hastināpura, and it is decided that, because of
the continuing conflict among the cousins over succession, the
territory should be divided into two; and so the Pāṇḍavas establish
themselves at neighbouring Indraprastha. This requires burning
down the surrounding forest in an extensive, graphically described
conflagration.28 Having established themselves, their friend Kṛṣṇa
encourages the eldest, Yudhiṣṭhira, to hold a grand sacrificial
ritual, the rājasūya, to mark their authority. This involves a pre­
liminary digvijaya, with his brothers going out to conquer in differ­
ent directions. This is ostensibly to conquer territory, but actually
to coerce other rājās into bringing tribute for the yajña.
The treasury of the Pāṇḍavas, having become so full that it
would be impossible to empty it in a hundred years, Yudhiṣṭhira ex-
pends his wealth on a rājasūya.29 Brāhmaṇas coming from all
over repeat their continuously heard refrain, diyatam (give).30
The rājasūya requires the consent of the kṣatriyas. Kṛṣṇa recites
their history, starting with their slaughter by Paraśurāma, down
to the contemporary Jarāsandha who was attacking kṣatriyas as
if he was a clone of Paraśurāma. Yet the rājasūya is required if
there is a claim to being the one above all others—the samrāṭ. This
is a claim to sovereignty. The question of status comes to the fore
when deciding who should be the honoured guest. The Pāṇḍava
choice, Kṛṣṇa, is opposed presumably because the Vṛṣṇis have a
low status among the lineages. Significantly, Kṛṣṇa is called arājā
(not a rājā).31
There are problems with the powerful Jarāsandha ruling in
Magadha, in the middle Ganges plain.32 He and Kṛṣṇa have been
enemies despite a matrimonial alliance with the Vṛṣṇis. Finally,
he is put to death in a rather unheroic manner by the Pāṇḍavas
at the instigation of Kṛṣṇa. Śiśupāla of the Cedis objects to the
Pāṇḍava choice of Kṛṣṇa as honoured guest since he is not of a
sufficiently high status, but he is silenced by Kṛṣṇa beheading
28 1.215ff.
29 2.30.7.
30 2.30.50, 13.61.11ff., 64.3, 68.2.
31 2.34.1–10.
32 2.13–22.
The Mahābhārata 155
him.33 The somewhat laboured passages describing Kṛṣṇa as even
greater than the great gods are surely later interpolations.34 The
conflict between and among some descendants of Yadu and Pūru
is significant, not entirely unrelated to an earlier conflict over
descent where Yadu, the eldest son of Yayāti, was superseded by
Pūru, the youngest.
The rājasūya is successfully completed, to the irritation of the
Kauravas, who later challenge the eldest of the five brothers to a
game of dice. This is normally part of the ritual of the rājasūya,35
replete with symbolic meaning, but is here narrated as a separate
and significant event subsequent to the ritual.
The highpoint of the game of dice is when Draupadī is placed
as a stake. She questions the legality of this action, given that the
Pāṇḍavas have already been staked and have lost. They not only
lose their territory and their wealth but have to go into exile for
thirteen years, which period they spend substantially in the forest.
They finally return to reclaim their territory and rights, but the
Kauravas refuse to concede these. This leads to the war in which
all the kṣatriya clans are ranged on either side. Insistence on battle
is also because Draupadī had been insulted by the Kauravas and
she wants revenge.
Much of the epic is then taken up with the details of the eigh­
teen-day battle. Kṛṣṇa is advisor to the Pāṇḍavas and they emerge
victorious. But the war has taken its toll on the kṣatriya world, the
world of the heroes, which virtually comes to a close. Kṛṣṇa makes
the appropriate historical comment to Dhṛtrāṣṭra: tav’aparādhān
nṛpate sarvam kṣatram kṣayam gatam (because of your wrong
actions as ruler, all the kṣatriyas have been destroyed).36 Events
subsequent to the war gradually lead to a pallid ending, with the
protagonists going to their respective afterlives: the anti­climax
to many stirring epics.
The narrative of a family feud over succession becomes an in­
volved text incorporating the participation of virtually every clan,
33 2.37ff.
34 3.186.13–16, 187.1–55, 256.29ff.
35 J.A.B. van Buitenen, The Mahābhārata, vol. 2, 5ff.
36 Śalyaparvan, 62.43.
156 The Past Before Us
interwoven with mythology, with discourses on how best to govern
with passages on ethical behaviour, and with the glorification of
Kṛṣṇa as the incarnation of Viṣṇu. Why Kṛṣṇa is chosen remains
a puzzle, given his ambiguity in relation to ethical norms, a mat­
ter which has been much commented upon.37 The story moves
sometimes easily and sometimes in a jagged fashion between the
essentials of a clan chiefship, with the anticipated authority of
emerging kingship waiting in the wings—as represented in the
Śānti and Anuśāsana parvans.
According to some, the epic is the glorification of a grand pot-
latch;38 according to others it is, in its later form, the popular text
of devotional religion. But, above all, the narrative is a version
of the past focusing on the perspective of the kṣatriya component
of clan societies, perhaps of the early first millennium bc. The
extensive sacrificial rituals of the heroic cult are not merely a
propitiation of deity but are also a form of legitimation for the rājā.
Of the accumulated wealth, some was consumed in the ritual, the
rest given as gifts to the priests. Pāṇini mentions the veneration of
kṣatriyas,39 which may have been associated with the pañca-vīra
cult of the Vṛṣṇis. The hero cult was sought to be strengthened
by equating battle with the ritual of sacrifice.40 The narrative bor­
rows occasionally from earlier sources, and reformulates what is
borrowed, both of which hint at the attempt to create a seminal
historical tradition.
3. Occasions for the Initial Recitation
of the Mahābhārata
The recitation of the Mahābhārata is associated with two special
occasions which suggest the phases of composition. The first
occasion was when the brāhmaṇa Vaiśampāyana, one of the
disciples of Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana Vyāsa, the compiler of the epic,
37 B.K. Matilal, Moral Dilemmas in the Mahābhārata.
38 G. Held, The Mahābhārata: An Ethnological Study; M. Mauss, The Gift.
39 Aṣṭādhyāyī of Pāṇini, 4.3.99.
40 Mahābhārata, 12.97.10 to 98.53, 12.99.12ff.; Ṛgveda, 10.154.3; Manu’s Code
of Law, 5.98; P. Filliozat, “The Afterdeath Destiny of the Hero According to
the Mahābhārata”, 3–8.
The Mahābhārata 157
recited it at the famous sarpa-sattra (snake sacrifice) performed
by Janamejaya. Sattras were distinctive because, frequently in
their performance, only brāhmaṇas were the patrons and no gift
was given to the ritual specialist. But on this occasion the patron
was a gift­giving kṣatriya.41 The narrative was being recited to
Janamejaya, the great­grandson of Arjuna, and was the story of
his immediate ancestors.42
Possibly the snake sacrifice is symbolic of obliteration: on
this occasion of the heroes.43 This, in effect, had taken place
both recently, in the battle at Kurukṣetra, as well as earlier, when
Paraśurāma exterminated the kṣatriyas. The recitation of itihāsa
and purāṇa was prescribed as expiation when an elder of the
family passed away, presumably to pass on the tradition to the
next generation.44 Was this Janamejaya’s gesture at the passing
away of his elders, where the Mahābhārata would be recited as
an itihāsa?
On the second occasion it was recited by a sūta, Ugraśravas,
at a sacrificial ritual performed some time later in the Naimiśa
forest by a group of brāhmaṇas, pre-eminently Śaunaka.45 The
bard began the recitation by providing a narrative of the Bhṛgu
ancestors of Śaunaka. This is virtually stating that the Bhṛgus
made a later rendering of the text, a statement they could not
formally admit to. There is therefore the curious anomaly of two
recitations at two different occasions,46 each said to be the initial
one, although the second recitation is claimed as exactly the same
as the first. The composition was originally proclaimed (proktah)
by Vyāsa, and narrated (kathitah) by Vaiśampāyana. The first
recitation was a literal repetition of the composition of Vyāsa by
Vaiśampāyana. In a sense, Vyāsa was narrating the story of his
grandsons. Ugraśravas had learnt it from his father Romaharṣana
(also a sūta), who had learnt it as a pupil of Vyāsa. It is once
41 C.Z. Minkowski, “Snakes, Sattras and the Mahābhārata”, 384ff.
42 1.54.18–20.
43 C.Z. Minkowski, “Janamejaya’s Sattra and Ritual Structure”, 401–20.
44 āśvalāyana Gṛhyasūtra, 4.6.6.
45 1.1.15–19.
46 Mahābhārata, 1.1.50ff.; see also G. Held, The Mahābhārata: An Ethno-
logical Study, 59ff.
158 The Past Before Us
removed, although Ugraśravas claims he is reciting it exactly
as his father learnt it. It is described as an ancient narrative and
its diverse forms. This gives the story a flavour of the historical.
There are some differences,47 and the time gap between the two
makes one later than the other.
It is curious that the two occasions were not coalesced in the
editing of the epic, unless this was deliberate, the intention being
to indicate that there was a second and later version for a different
purpose. Was the second a recitation of the Bhṛgu version—there­
fore the recitation of Bhṛgu ancestors—claiming to be the original
composition of Vyāsa? The brāhmaṇa recites the narrative to the
kṣatriyas and the sūta recites it to the brāhmaṇas. The interplay
of the role of brāhmaṇas and sūtas was to be a continuing feature
of compositions associated with itihāsa.
For such a text to be put together, the burden fell on the com­
piler rather than the author. Vyāsa may have been doing just that:
compiling rather than authoring. Vyāsa listens to fragments being
recited off and on,48 for it is said that this itihāsa has been recited
before by kavis and will be recited by them again in the future.49
Although it is described as the Veda,50 unlike the Vedas expansion
is allowed and encouraged. Those who recite it should support
their narrative from the earlier itihāsa and purāṇa.51
Vyasa was traditionally thought of as the learned ṛṣi (sage)
who is said to have edited a variety of compositions, such as the
Vedas, the Mahābhārata, and the early Purāṇas. In fact this state­
ment may mean that a recognized oral composition was taken out
of the hands of its original authors, the sūtas, and ascribed to a
ṛṣi, putting it into a brahmanical framework. Vyāsa, despite his
mixed parentage,52 was evidently acceptable as a brāhmaṇa. Once
again there are echoes of dāsī­putrāḥ brāhmaṇas. There were
47 A. Hiltebeitel, Rethinking the Mahābhārata, 96ff.
48 B.M. Sullivan, Seer of the Fifth Veda.
49 1.1.24.
50 1.1.2, 1.1.16–19, 1.1.205, 1.56.17.
51 1.1.204.
52 As noted above (in section 2 of this chapter), he was born to Satyavatī, a
woman of the fisherfolk said to be the daughter of an apsarā, and the ṛṣi Parāśara,
the son of a brāhmaṇa father but of a low­caste mother. Attempts were made
later to suggest that Satyavatī was actually the daughter of a kṣatriya.
The Mahābhārata 159
attempts later to improve his caste status through other legends
of his parentage. The recitation by the bard Ugraśravas sounds
more authentic, except that his name, meaning “loud­throated”,
seems a trifle sarcastic.
Its recitation at a sacrificial ritual linked the epic to the ākhyā-
nas of earlier times, also recited at ritual occasions. Was the
Mahābhārata in origin a collation of ākhyānas?53 The shift would
have been from unconnected scattered stories to a continuous one
linked by a narrative framework. The sūta says that whereas the
brāhmaṇas recited stories from the Vedas during pauses in the
ritual, Vyāsa recited the Mahābhārata.54 A summary of the core
narrative given by Vaiśampāyana was presumably based on the
kathā.55
The brāhmaṇa Śaunaka, presiding over the sattra in the Naimiśa
forest, asked Ugraśravas to begin by reciting the genealogy of
the Bhṛgu brāhmaṇas who were his ancestors.56 Once again, the
invocation is of a believed past. This was in accordance with the
practice, as it had evolved, of authors initially reciting the genea­
logy of patrons. Subsequent to the Bhārgava genealogy, with its
claims to status, there followed claims for the hero’s ancestry, that
of the Pūru lineage as given in the Ādi parvan of the Mahābhārata.
The replay of earlier narratives takes new forms. Thus, mention is
made of Devāpi and Śantanu in the Ṛgveda, which is elaborated in
the Nirukta and Bṛhad-devatā, where they are said to be Kurus.57
Devāpi’s skin disease is omitted in the Mahābhārata but is reflected
in the physical infirmity of Pāṇḍu. The role of the “rain-maker”,
symbolic of magical power, is now absent, not being required in
later polities.
The function of the sūta was being gradually differentiated,
making it professionally important to the rājās of the time, even if
it was lower than that of the brāhmaṇas. Ugraśravas is deferential
towards the brāhmaṇas and addresses them as dvija and vipra,
53 R.C. Hazra, “The Aśvamedha, the Common Source of Origin of the Purāṇa
Pañca-lakṣaṇa and the Mahābhārata”, 190–203.
54 1.53.32.
55 1.53.27 to 1.56.30.
56 1.5.
57 Ṛgveda, 10.98; Nirukta of Yāska, 2.10; Bṛhad-devatā, 7.154, 8.7; Mahā-
bhārata, 1.97.1.ff., 1.50.42–3, 5.149.15.
160 The Past Before Us
and the bard is referred to as sūtanandana.58 Mention is made
of the sūta, māgadha, and kuśīlava, all categories of bards, and
all of whom tend to have a low status. Possibly this change also
reflected the incorporation of local bards attached to lesser rājās,
and the status of these would perforce have to be kept distanced
from a rising brahmanical strata.
4. Dating the Epic
Analyses of the epic go back to the earliest discussions on its date.
In these, incidents and descriptions are shown to be of varying
dates, which makes the chronology of the narrative uncertain.59
There are diverse views on dating the epic. Some tend to assign it
to a short period, whereas others argue that the different fragments
have each to be dated separately. In the latter view, the collation
as we have it today spreads across a few centuries, from the mid­
first millennium bc—at which time the early bardic version would
have been familiar—to the early first millennium ad, by when
the accretions relating to the worship of Viṣṇu and of the pre-
eminence of kingship had been written in.60 The later sections
can be seen as justifying the change to incipient kingship, which
differed from the social infrastructure of the earlier clan society.
Much has been written on the possible origins and versions of
the Mahābhārata before the present one, and the radical changes
introduced in each, and where this process implies historical
change.61 The dichotomy suggested between the epic and the
pseudo­epic was explored at length and has been revived by
some, pre­eminently in the separation between the narrative and
didactic sections.62
58 1.2.1ff.
59 E.W. Hopkins, The Great Epic of India, 386–9.
60 V.S. Sukthankar, On the Meaning of the Mahābhārata.
61 See the summary of views in V.S. Sukthankar, On the Meaning of the
Mahābhārata; A. Hiltebeitel, Ritual of Battle; J.F. Fitzgerald, Introduction to
Śāntiparvan, Mahābhārata (Book xii, trans.).
62 E.W. Hopkins, The Social and Military Position of the Ruling Caste in
Ancient India as Represented in the Sanskrit Epic, 57ff.; also idem, The Great
Epic of India.
The Mahābhārata 161
Whether the text was composed in a unitary form by a single
author, or put together by a group of authors over a short period
of a century, between c. 150 and 0 bc, has been much discussed.63
Some of this discussion questions Sukthankar’s view of a long
period of composition and compilation. That there was an attempt
at some unity would be the purpose of editing the text, but as a
historical source it is difficult to concede that it was a one-time
composition since an epic by its very nature incorporates variant
views and contradictions. Obviously, therefore, to speak of an
“epic age” as historians did, not so long ago, makes little histori­
cal sense.64
There is no agreement on the date of the central event, the
war at Kurukṣetra. One view holds that it marks the end of the
Dvāparayuga (the third age) and the beginning of the Kaliyuga (the
fourth and final age of the great cycle). This has been calculated
as the equivalent of 3102 bc.65 The theory of the four yugas or
time cycles described in the epic is, however, late and is dated to
around the Christian era.
The Puranic genealogies would contradict the date of 3102 bc,66
stating that there were either 1015 or 1050 years between Parikṣit
ruling soon after the war, and Mahāpadma Nanda, known to
be ruling in the fourth century bc. Kalhaṇa dates the Kurus and
Pāṇḍavas to 653 years after the start of the Kaliyuga.67
Another somewhat uncertain method used in recent times is
that of counting the generations in the genealogies and calculating
a certain average number of years per generation, which results
63 M. Biardeau, “Some More Considerations about Textual Criticism”,
115–23; A. Hiltebeitel, Rethinking the Mahābhārata.
64 By way of comparison it should be pointed out that the attribution of single
authorship of the Greek epics to Homer is now doubted, with other poets prior
and subsequent to Homer thought to be contributing to the composition. This
also brings historicity into doubt even in an event as central to the Greek epic
as the Trojan war. K.A. Raaflaub, “Epic and History”, 55–70.
65 See D.C. Sircar, “Myth of the Great Bhārata War”, 18ff. For earlier views
on the date of the Kaliyuga, see Āryabhaṭṭa in D.C. Sircar, Indian Epigraphy, 222;
Aihole Inscription, Ep. Ind., 6.1ff.; Varāhamihira’s Bṛhat-saṃhitā, 13.3.
66 F.E. Pargiter, Dynasties of the Kali Age, 74.
67 Rājataraṅgiṇī, 1.51.
162 The Past Before Us
in a date close to the second millennium bc.68 Astronomical data
has been used to calculate the date to 2449 bc.69 Yet none of
these early dates fit the contextual evidence. Given the structure
of the epic, the Bhārata ākhyāna/kathā was doubtless known by
the mid-first millennium bc, and the inclusion of the Bhāgavata
cult would date to the rise of Bhagavatism at the end of the first
millennium bc.
There appear to have been two strands in the epic. The bardic
material referred to events which were believed to have happened,
and these are therefore associated with itihāsa and familiar. The
other was the brahmanical input, largely expressed in the didac ­
tic sections. The Bhṛgu brāhmaṇas are thought to have introduced
aspects of the dharmaśāstra tradition—discussions on dharma and
nīti (polity)—and on the worship of Viṣṇu as part of the Bhāga-
vata ideology.70 The Mahābhārata sometimes used atīta, ākhyāna,
and kathā, all referring to narratives—both cosmological and
others—synonymously.71 The early sections are referred to as
itihāsa.72 In the later sections it is said that the past is an exemplar
to the present, atrāpy udāharantīmam itihāsam purātanam . . .73
This becomes a formula for referring to the past and looking back
into a more remote past, and is quite consciously introduced in
the interpolated sections.
Examples quoted from the past, to illustrate a point being made
in the present, consist of narratives which begin with the statement
that they are itihāsam purātanam, i.e. narratives of what happened
in the past, a phrase also used in the Upaniṣads. A reference to the
Pāṇḍavas, as having through their own valour regained the realm
that they had lost to the sons of Dhṛtrāṣṭra, is treated as something
from the distant past, unrelated to current events.74 This would
68 S.N. Pradhan, Chronology of Ancient India, 258–60; P.L. Bhargava, India
in the Vedic Age; R. Morton­Smith, Dates and Dynasties in Early India.
69 D.C. Sircar (ed.), The Bhārata War and Puranic Genealogies, 19.
70 V.S. Sukthankar, “The Bhṛgus and the Bhārata: A Text-Historical Study”,
1–76.
71 E.W. Hopkins, The Great Epic of India, 48.
72 1.1.17, 1.54.23.
73 E.g. 12.259.2, 13.137.2.
74 13.6.40.
The Mahābhārata 163
reinforce the argument that much of the Anuśāsana parvan was
an addition of the early Christian era. The Śānti and Anuśāsana
parvans carry statements that are sometimes similar to those in the
Manu Dharmaśāstra and the Kauṭilya Arthaśāstra, which further
suggest a date of post­Mauryan times.
The function of itihāsa is not necessarily to provide what we
would today call “authentic history”, but to project an earlier age
and its ideals, as well as to introduce the different context of the
later time when the composition was re-edited. (Bhīṣma, lying
on a bed of arrows, in the throes of dying, but holding forth for
days on matters of dharma, varṇa, and mokṣa, would be one such
mechanism.) Thus, the archaeological search for material culture
as the counterpart of the epic becomes something of a chimera.
The manipulation of time in the epic is too complex for there to be
a correlation with archaeological periodization. At most, artefacts
may provide tangible forms to some descriptions in the epic.
An attempt was made to date epic events by referring to the silt
deposit at the site of Hastināpura, and correlating it with mention
of a flood of this town soon after the war, which led to a migra­
tion south to Kauśāmbi. The silt deposit dates to about the eighth
century bc,75 a date at variance with other suggested dates. The
story of the shifting of the capital may have been invented by
those who founded Kauśāmbi, to claim a link with Hastināpura.
Comparisons with archaeological material require more than the
juxtaposition of artefact with text.76
Heroic society prior to the rise of states is doubtless the context
to the earlier narrative. The intermingling of various cultures is
such that texts looking back on the past would inevitably have
to be multi­layered.77 The epic was probably in origin localized
and known initially in the western Ganges plain, from where it
spread to other parts. Various local narrative fragments are likely
to have been added on, becoming part of the text, ensuring them
both status and continuity.
75 B.B. Lal, “Excavation at Hastinapur and other Explorations in the Upper
Ganga and Sutlej Basins”, 4ff.
76 G. Lad, Mahābhārata and Archaeological Evidence, 65ff.
77 M. Witzel, “The Vedas and the Epics . . .”, 21–80.
164 The Past Before Us
There is a popular opinion that the Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa is earlier
than the Mahābhārata since the latter gives a version of the story
of Rāma in the Rāmopākhyāna section of the text. However, this
could be a later interpolation. Events in the Mahābhārata are set
in an earlier socio­political system.
5. The Authors
The Mahābhārata in its present form suggests the possibility of
phases in its authorship: the oral compositions of the sūtas, their
rendering into a literary form by Vyāsa, and the introduction
of new political, social, and religious ideas perhaps by Bhṛgu
brāhmaṇas. That the latter did not expunge the former would point
to the propagation of Bhāgvatism being facilitated by converting
an established and popular narrative. The bardic material was
probably viewed as a kind of history and therefore could not be
discarded, especially if the kṣatriya tradition thought it important.
This pattern of authorship implies that there may originally have
been compositions in Prākrit which were then rendered into
Sanskrit, the redactors being aware of the political potential in
appropriating this material.
Within this possible dual authorship there is also the tension
between the non­brāhmaṇa element where, for example, varṇa
rules and the dharmaśāstra norms seem absent and the counterpart
views of the brāhmaṇa redactors, who, if they were Bhṛgus and
earlier associated with magic, sorcery, and marginal groups such
as the vrātyas, were now moving into the foreground of brahmani­
cal social functioning.
There is no agreement on the length of the text. The earliest
version may have been the Jaya of 8800 verses; then the Bhārata,
attributed to Vyāsa, consisting of 24,000 verses; this was later in­
flated to 100,000 verses and came to be called the Mahābhārata.78
The theory of three different versions of the Jaya, Bhārata, and
Mahābhārata, composed variously, has been questioned.79 While
78 van Buitenen, The Mahābhārata, 1, xxiii, 1.1.61.
79 A. Mehendale, “A Review of Yardi, M.R., The Mahabharata: Its Genesis
and Growth”. Yardi attempts a statistical analysis based on metre and argues
The Mahābhārata 165
some sources refer to two texts,80 the Bhārata and the Mahā-
bhārata, the epic itself makes no such distinction. It states that
the prefix of mahat is applied to the Bhārata.81
The epic has many stock items of the bardic repertoire, such as
descriptions of halls and residences, the grandeur of guests invited
on special occasions, and the recital of conflicts.82 Another feature
is the constant boxing in of stories, which provides the opening
for infinite tales, not to mention the repetition of the same stories
in different contexts, such as that of Paraśurāma.83
Other segments show the bardic presence through the inclusion
of genealogies. A gāthā called the anuvaṃśya carrying genealogies
is associated with a ṛṣi.84 Later sources refer to the sūta maintain­
ing genealogies.85 The sūta and the māgadha, numbering some
eight hundred, are said to be employed by Yudhiṣṭhira, reminis­
cent of the musicians accompanied by the vīnāgāthins.86 Theirs
were songs of victory, recitations of genealogies and eulogies on
the gifts received and their donor.87 The function of charioteer
associated with the sūta may have contributed to lowering his
status by the time of Manu.88
The sanction of the bard also derived from the belief that the
epic was a record of what had happened. This belief is significant,
even though we know today that the factual element in the epic
was limited. Events can be confused or genealogies telescoped
or extended since the compiler has the licence to rearrange his
material. What we now have is a generalized view of the past, but
worked over by redactors.
The sūtas, as bards, had a distinct and separate status. That they
for four recensions of the original text. See also N.J. Shende, “The Authorship
of the Mahabharata”, 67–82.
80 āśvalāyana Gṛhyasūtra, 3.4.4.
81 1.1.209.
82 E.g., 2.7.1ff., 2.8.1ff., 2.31.1–9, 3.175–6.
83 E.g., 1.98.1ff., 12.50.
84 3.86.5.
85 Vāyu Purāṇa, 1.26–31; Padma Purāṇa, 5.1.27–8.
86 Cf. Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 13.4.3.3–5.
87 1.206.2, 3.43.15ff.
88 Manu’s Code of Law, 10.11, 17, 26, 47.
166 The Past Before Us
were initially respected and associated with various immunities
such as personal inviolability—they could not come to harm—is
one indication.89 This may have been a concession to the represent­
ation of the actions of the rājā crucial to his reputation. Perhaps
they were inviolable in the kṣatriya domain because, as chario ­
teers of the rājā, when visiting other rājās on special missions they
were representing their patron. Their status tended to rise with the
status of their patrons, but when the compositions were taken over
by other groups in society the status of the bard was deliberately
lowered, as evident in the Dharmaśāstra of Manu.
In the vision of the bard the agents of history are in part histori­
cal, in part allegorical, and in part mythical.90 Thus he comes to
be seen at times as the inheritor of the shaman, and as a mantic,
both merging into the seer. For such a person the knowledge of
the past lies in events and genealogies, and of the future in pro­
phetic utterance and inspired speech.91 The finest recitations were
thus performances by him on special occasions before a select
audience.
If the epic was at some stage added to by the Bhṛgus, their inte-
rest in doing so needs to be known. Their status in the Vedic corpus
is unclear. Bhṛgus are priests to the asuras—the force of evil, they
married kṣatriya women, were associated with violence, sorcery,
and the violation of norms;92 yet they are also brāhmaṇas.
The pre-eminent Bhṛgu, Śukra, was superior to the priest of
the devas because he knew how to revive those who had died, so
those that fell in battle rose up again to battle further.93 His magical
power is reminiscent of the power of shamans. The kavis bestowed
immortality through their compositions, and this carefully guarded
knowledge was passed on to their sons. However, because it was
realized that immortality can also be acquired through history,
memory, and records, the control of these becomes crucial.
89 Taittirīya Saṃhitā, 4.5.2 ahantya; Vājasaneyī Saṃhitā, 16.18 ahanti. Both
forms suggest ahanya: not to be slain. A.A. Macdonell and A.B. Keith, Vedic
Index, vol. II, 463.
90 M. Abrams, Natural Supernaturalism, 332.
91 N.K. Chadwick, Poetry and Prophecy, 14ff.
92 R.P. Goldman, Gods, Priests and Warriors, 144ff.
93 G. Dumezil, The Plight of a Sorcerer.
The Mahābhārata 167
As brāhmaṇas who had married into kṣatriya families, and as
occasional warriors, they could have been motivated to maintain
and reconstruct the kṣatriya tradition. They placed themselves
above the kṣatriyas, and as among those brāhmaṇas who could
challenge even gods such as Agni and Indra. They were parti­
cularly concerned with discourses on dharma and nīti, theories
of the functioning of society and polity. This could in part explain
the induction of these into the Śānti and Anuśāsana parvans, and
occasionally elsewhere. Yet they themselves were not averse to
acting contrary to these codes, perhaps to demonstrate that they
were above the norms.
The Mahābhārata has many myths about the Bhṛgus in which
they are generally in conflict, and successfully so, with the kṣa tri-
yas or even the gods.94 They are said to be proficient in the func-
tions of the kṣatriyas, but were also their priests. However, since
they married into kṣatriya families they could have become
brāhmaṇas of a lesser, brahma-kṣatra, status. Paraśurāma (also
known as Rāma Jamadāgni) was of Bhṛgu descent, and in his fury
destroyed all the kṣatriyas twenty­one times.95 The destruction
began with matricide.96 It took place in Kurukṣetra, as did the
second destruction of the kṣatriyas in the battle. If Paraśurāma
destroyed the kṣatriyas, then kṣatriya women would have had to
procreate through brāhmaṇas, resulting in the mixing of the two
varṇas.97 This strengthens the notion of the coming into being
of brahma­kṣatra. These kṣatriyas were predictably superior, as
would have been their descendants.98
It has been plausibly argued that the story of the destruction of
the kṣatriyas reflects the Bhṛgus taking over the kṣatriya history
and tradition.99 To argue for a Bhṛgu redaction is not to suggest
that the Bhṛgus went through the text with a fine comb, syste-
matically eliminating what they disapproved of and substituting,
in every case, their own views. More likely, they inflated the
94 3.115–17.
95 E.g., 12.49.30ff.
96 3.116.5ff.
97 1.58.1–29, 1.98.1–6.
98 1.58.4ff., 12.49.55ff.
99 R.P. Goldman, Gods, Priests and Warriors, 112ff.
168 The Past Before Us
text by inserting what they thought was appropriate at particular
points and including extensive additions. Some sentiments of the
previous authorship would therefore have continued into the later
text.100 The induction of the didactic sections and their worldview
signalled the need to justify kingship eventually replacing clan
society.
The adding on of material was not limited to heroic narra­
tive but included, among other things, large swathes of instruc­
tions pertaining to kingship, and the introduction of Vaiṣṇava
Bhāgavatism. The Śānti and Ānuśāsana parvans are didactic in
character, purporting to matters relating to kingship, governance,
and social obligations These passages have some parallels in
existing Dharmaśāstras and the Arthaśāstra.
The worship of Vedic deities gave way to deities which had
earlier remained relatively backstage, such as Śiva and Viṣṇu.101
Vaiṣṇava Bhāgavatism is different from the religion of the Vedas,
even if it sometimes evokes their authority. Kṛṣṇa becomes an
avatāra of Viṣṇu. The obvious addition of the Bhagavadgītā was
said to be the teaching of Kṛṣṇa as this incarnation.102
It was possible to appropriate the literature of the earlier stage
and adapt it to contemporary needs through interpolations. The
continuity of the text required the retention of some sections so
that an ancient authenticity could be claimed. The attempt is not
to homogenize but to provide diverse situations with which incor­
porated groups can identify and find their own reflection in this
compendium. It becomes a text with multiple voices.
This process was in part the reverse of the dāna­stuti hymns.
The narratives of heroes, culled as a category outside ritual compo­
sitions, were now made to absorb a sacred ambience. Bhāgavatism
was being embedded in the epic. Why this was done was in part
100 N. Hein, “Epic Sarvabhūtahite Rataḥ: A By-word of Non-Bhārgava
Editors”, 17­35, makes much of this phrase and argues that delighting in the
welfare of all beings was not a Bhārgava sentiment. But it is, at the same time,
not offensive to the Bhṛgu view.
101 V.S. Sukthankar, On the Meaning of the Mahābhārata, 63, 71; M. Winter­
nitz, History of Indian Literature, vol. I, 422ff.
102 This smaller text was also not composed at a single point in time but was
added to on more than one occasion. See A.L. Basham, The Origins and Deve-
lopment of Classical Hinduism, 82–97.
The Mahābhārata 169
to control the believed history of the heroes and in part to ride on
the popularity of the heroes to preach a new sectarian religion by
converting them into representing and endorsing it. This idea may
have been borrowed from the heterodox sects, where biographies
of the Buddha and Mahāvīra were helpful in propagating their
teachings and asserting their historicity.
The new religion required devotion to the deity. Legitimation
was therefore through the intervention of the deity, as in the case
of Kṛṣṇa assisting the Pāṇḍavas. Being sired by gods did not make
the heroes either gods, or their incarnations, but it gave them a
special status. What continued to hold from earlier belief was
that after a heroic death the hero lived eternally and blissfully in
the heaven of Indra. The end of the kṣatriyas by whatever means
was in effect symbolic of the end of the clan system and a way of
introducing historical change.
This was not just an incidental change. The period from the
Mauryas to the Guptas, when the present form of the epic was
finalized, witnessed many confrontations between gaṇa-saṅghas
and kingdoms. Inscriptions refer to kings destroying kṣatriyas.
These are likely to have been references to the kṣatriyas of the
gaṇa-saṅghas. The Nanda and Maurya states absorbed those of
the middle Ganges plain, such as the Vṛjjis, Śākyas, and Licchavis,
who are subsequently not associated with this region. Others in
Rajasthan, Gujarat, Punjab, the Upper Doab and Central India
survived until Gupta times. The political economy of kingship
had to subordinate if not uproot the gaṇa-saṅghas.
The other challenge came from heterodox sects that received
extensive patronage from dynasties described in brahmanical
sources as śūdra and mleccha. That the redactors did not support
Jarāsandha, despite his representing the transition to kingship in
Magadha, was possibly because the rulers of Magadha support ­
ed heterodox sects, and where such sects had a following. In
the delineation of Yudhiṣṭhira there appears to be an attempt to
appropriate righteous rulers.103 There was competition between
the heterodox and brahmanical sects, and the latter’s view of the
103 In ad 449 an inscription from eastern India quotes Yudhiṣṭhira’s protection
of land given to brāhmaṇas as a precedent for current donation. Damodarpur
Inscription no. 2, Ep. Ind., 15, 134.
170 The Past Before Us
governance of society, different from the heterodox view, had to
be propagated. The denial of the Vedas and of Vedic deities by
the heterodox led to the latter being called nāstika by the brāh-
maṇas.
Clan societies resisted the change to kingship and were seen as
an ideological threat by established kingdoms. Kauṭilya advises
the decimation of clan society. Not only was their political form a
threat, so too was their not conforming to the varṇāśrama-dharma.
Buddhism and Jainism were initially rooted in the gaṇa-saṅghas
of the middle Ganges plain, but from the Mauryan period their
saṅghas attracted the patronage not only of royalty but also of
wealthy artisans, merchants, and land­owners. Their substantial
monastic establishments must have raised the ire of those without
such patronage.
And there were also the people of the forests resisting the en­
croachment of settlers. The Arthaśāstra and Aśokan inscriptions
both record the hostility of the state towards such people.104 Exile
in the forest has many meanings, but one among them was to en­
able the grāma (the village settlement) to justify its encroachment
into the araṇya (the forest). The people of the forest are therefore
often demonized so as to deepen dichotomous categories.
The definition of dharma as expounded in the rāja-dharma and
the varṇāśrama-dharma had to be differentiated from the Budd-
hist definition rooted in the universal application of social ethics
irrespective of caste status. The definition of dharma becomes
pivotal to a debate in which the orthodox demanded that kings
destroy dasyus. In Buddhist and Jaina thought, dharma is the
ethic born of relatively egalitarian social norms; and because it
is authorized by humans it is not subjected to any other author­
ity. Brahmanical thought was governed by social inequality and
required both divine authority and Vedic sanction.105 The debate
touches on the acceptance or non­acceptance of the Vedas, a
matter that was repeatedly raised in philosophical discussion.
Dharma also raises issues of fate and karma which affect the
human condition. The basic difference is over whether humans can
104 Arthaśāstra, 2.1.36, 7.2.19, 8.1.54, 1.16.29, 8.4.41–2; Major Rock Edict 13;
J. Bloch, Les Inscriptions d’Asoka,129.
105 Manu’s Code of Law, 2.6.
The Mahābhārata 171
control their fate. Kṛṣṇa accuses Dhṛtarāṣṭra of being the cause of
the killing.106 Dhṛtarāṣṭra invokes the power of both dhatṛ (fate)
and karma (causally connected actions). In a sense, both are im­
personal and beyond control, since even karma is an inheritance
from a previous birth.
The Bhṛgu intervention touches on many changes of the time.
The importance of āpad-dharma could refer to brāhmaṇas los­
ing out on royal patronage given at this point more frequently to
heterodox sects. Vedic Brahmanism was appropriate to its brah­
manical practitioners and the society that it endorsed, but with
change and the need for popular support—which had become
characteristic of the heterodoxies—a reformulation may have been
thought necessary. This was reflected in the emergence of Puranic
religions. The propagation of the Mahābhārata seems to have
been at two levels. The narrative of the heroes became a familiar
story, referred to in many later sources and in popular repertoires
of story­telling.107 The sūta was peripatetic and recited portions
of the epic to assembled groups or at places of pilgrimage.108 The
propagation of the ideology of the Mahābhārata, as redacted later,
was encapsulated in the Gītā but more expansively explained in
the Śānti and Anuśāsana parvans. This required more labour and
an intensive effort.
The Bhṛgus emerge as efficient propagandists and their inten­
tion was to intervene in the reading of the past so as to make
it support their own ideology. The Pāṇḍava victory is largely
dependent on advice from Kṛṣṇa, the incarnation of Viṣṇu. His
intervention is also beneficial to them at many crucial situations
in the story. Although the Bhṛgus break the rules of varṇāśrama-
dharma, they make it a focus in their interventions in the itihāsa-
purāṇa tradition. Such intervention, therefore, is concerned less
with demonstrating the historicity of persons and events, and
more with presenting a view of the past, as well as a reading of
it in a manner recognizable to contemporaries—as encapsulating
a changing society.
106 Mahābhārata, 9.62.38ff.
107 Nasik Cave Inscriptions, Ep. Ind., 8, 2, 60ff.
108 Y. Vassilkov, “Indian Practice of Pilgrimage and the Growth of the Mahā-
bhārata”.
172 The Past Before Us
6. Genealogies as Frames of the Past
The Mahābhārata is a story within a frame, recited as part of a
ritual. It is an extension therefore of the notion and function of the
ākhyāna, where the narrative momentarily supersedes the ritual. It
is presented as the past of the pre­eminent lineage of the Bharatas,
and, by extension, as an exposition of dharma for kings and men
as appropriate to the fifth Veda. The story of the Bharatas is the
Table II
Abbreviated Descent List
Manu
Ilā
Purūrvas
Yayāti
Yadu Anu Druhyu Turvaśa Pūru
Haihaya
Cedi
Bharata
Hastin
Ajamīḍha
Sātvata N. Pañcāla S. Pañcāla
Andhaka-Vṛṣṇi
Divodāsa
Sudās
Kuru
Jarāsandha
Kṛṣṇa Śiśupāla Drupada Dhṛtarāṣṭra Pāṇḍu
Janamejaya
The Mahābhārata 173
spine of the narrative which holds together the stories of other
kṣatriya descent groups. An elaborately constructed narrative of
the Bharatas is central to the perception of the past, gathered from
the Vedic corpus and other oral traditions.
The Ādi parvan, as the first book of the Mahābhārata, sets
out the descent lists of the clans. The Sabhā parvan is a logical
sequence as it is concerned with establishing the legitimacy of
the Pāṇḍavas to rule, the Kurus having contested this. But, more
importantly, it represents the functioning of a chiefship. The build­
ing of a sabhā (assembly hall) encapsulates a dynamic aspect of
this function, the hub of decision-making, as exemplified in the
sabhā of another clan, that of the Vṛṣṇis. The sabhā, a structure
too sophisticated for a simple assembly hall, is built by the enig­
matic Asura Maya. Nārada arrives at this point and speaks on the
principles of kingship and kingdoms, hinting at an imminent
change. Such interventions are preliminary to the more extensive
discourses in the Śānti and Anuśāsana parvans.
The descent comes in segments and is interspersed with legends.
The bardic form has clearly been worked over by later authors
acknowledging the importance of itihāsa and purāṇa.109 Creation
starts with the cosmic egg, out of which come the orders of deities
and men, of the universe, and of time. The descent of the Kurus
is suggestively associated with the deities. A brief history of the
Bhṛgus is included at this point, hinting at a special connection.
Genealogies of various celestial and supernatural beings, such as
devas, dānavas, gāndharvas, apsarās, and yakṣas follow, as does a
list of asuras born as kings. Subsequent to this comes the lineage
of Bharata. There is some logic to this sequence, covering cre­
ation, the gods and the presumed early history of the heroes. These
concerns mark the epic as a departure from the Vedic corpus. In
the latter, such references and narratives are scattered, whereas
in the epic there is at least an attempt at order and sequence, sug­
gesting a homogenizing of the theme and a move towards seeing
a pattern in the past.
The sūta Ugraśravas recites the lineage of the Bhṛgus to their
descendant Śaunaka. It has only eight generations going from
109 1.1.15.
174 The Past Before Us
father to son. In almost every case there is the story of some ex ­
ploit associated with the person. Such a brief succession list hardly
calls for the expertise of a bard; nevertheless, the Bhṛgu brāhmaṇa
asks the sūta to provide the information, hinting at the need for
a professional record.
There is a fuller account of the lineage of the heroes and as­
sociated legends. Manu, who had ten sons, is mentioned briefly as
a founding ancestor.110 One son, Ila/Ilā, was a hermaphrodite and
as a woman gave birth to Purūravas. Of his sons and grandsons,
the eldest was Yayāti.
With the descent of the Bharatas, the information becomes
more detailed. The sūta claims to be repeating what had been
recited by Vaiśampāyana. The genealogy earlier given in a short­
ened version is then repeated in more detail.111 The two versions
agree in part, but not entirely—which contradicts the claim. Both
telescoping and extending are recognized bardic techniques in the
making of genealogies.
The longer genealogy begins with the claim that the god Dakṣa
was the ancestor, and then proceeds with the descent list. Yayāti
is important, as are the eldest and youngest of his five sons: Yadu,
Turvaśa, Druhyu, Anu, Pūru (familiar names from the Ṛgveda).
Yayāti banishes the eldest, Yadu, and appoints the youngest, Pūru,
to succeed him. So the line continues through Pūru. Of the five the
first two are the sons of Devayānī, the daughter of a Bhṛgu sage,
and the last three the sons of Śarmiṣṭha, the daughter of a powerful
dānava. This meant that these sons had asura links on the mater­
nal side. In one Vedic text Pūru is referred to as descended from
an asura rākṣasa.112 The Bhṛgu connection is introduced with this
lineage, and there is a fair amount of intermixing.
Further down the line, Duḥṣanta marries Śakuntalā, the daugh­
ter of an apsarā. Bharata is his son, after whom the line is named.
Bhumanyu is recognized as a son by Bharata in the shorter list,
where it is made clear that he was actually not the son of Bharata
but of Bharadvāja. This was a significant difference and perhaps
110 1.70.13ff.
111 Cf. 1.89.1ff. with 1.90.1ff.
112 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 6.8.1.14.
The Mahābhārata 175
signalled a disjuncture in the descent. Hastin is said to have
founded Hastināpura, the main settlement of the Kurus. The son
of Ajamīḍha founded the Pañcāla line. We finally come to Devāpi
and Śantanu, which brings us to the epic events.
Succession goes through the sons, fathered by Vyāsa on the two
widows of Vicitravīrya.113 Technically, these sons do not belong
to the bloodline and this should mark a break, but the succession
is seamless. The Pāṇḍavas, in addition to their joint wife, marry
other women. The line continues through Arjuna’s marriage to
Subhadrā, the sister of Kṛṣṇa, and the birth of their son Abhi­
manyu, which unites the Yadu and Pūru lineages. He is the father
of Parikṣit, whose son in turn is Janamejaya, to whom the epic
events are being narrated.
The shorter version lists all the sons in each generation, al­
though the succession generally, but not invariably, goes through
the eldest—Arjuna’s descendants being one such exception. Fre­
quently, the wives are mentioned with an inclusion of the clan or
the region of their provenance. Women as the link between clans
were more characteristic of these societies. In the earlier part of
the longer genealogy there are names which are familiar from the
Vedic corpus. The more famous names from the Ṛgveda—such as
Sudāsa or Trasadasyu or Purukutsa—are not included in the lists,
although they are mentioned individually elsewhere in the epic.
There seem to have been some attempts, however, to draw a few
names from the Vedas and fit them into the genealogical framework
of the epic, as for example the five sons of Yayāti.
The two versions of the descent lists attempt a continuous suc­
cession, with no break from the time of Manu to events after the
war. In fact, however, there are breaks which are barely papered
over. If the list were entirely fictive, breaks would not be neces­
sary: their existence suggests other clans being stitched onto the
main lineage. At such seeming points, there are stories. The first
major break appears to be that of Pūru, the youngest son, suc­
ceeding Yayāti. This decision was questioned by the brāhmaṇas
113 The names of the wives of Vicitravīrya recall the tryaṃbaka mantra—
ambā ambikā ambālikā—in the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 13.2.8.1–3, associated
with a fertility rite.
176 The Past Before Us
because, according to the law, the eldest son by an official wife
could not be superseded.114 The compromise agreement was that
the son who showed concern for the welfare of his father should
succeed, and Pūru had agreed to confer his youth onto his ageing
father.
The next break seems to come with Bharata, who adopted
Bhumanyu, a son of Bharadvāja. Adoption, when referred to in
genealogies, is frequently an indication of a new line.
The establishment of Hastināpura by Hastin would suggest a
concentration in the Doab and an assertion of power in this area,
or again the incorporation of local people into the settlement.
Ajamīḍha is said to have had six sons, one of whom was ancestor
to the Pañcālas, literally meaning “the five peoples” or “the five
houses”, presumably a confederacy of five clans. One curious
parallel to earlier narratives is the story of the Pañcālas attacking
the Bharatas, who then fled to the Sindhu region, where they lived
for a long while until Vasiṣṭha helped them win back their terri-
tory.115 This echoes the story of the dāśarājña in the Ṛgveda.116
Eventually, the descendants of the Bharatas returned to the western
Ganges plain, where Kuru is said to have bestowed his name on
the region, which was called Kurujāṅgala—the Kuru forest—
and where the great war was fought on the “field of the Kurus”,
Kurukṣetra. Kurujāṅgala giving way to Kurukṣetra suggests a
significant change in the history of land use. The final segment,
subsequent to Śantanu, is quite obviously a break, for the lineage
actually terminates with Bhīṣma. The descendents of Dhṛtarāṣṭra
and Pāṇḍu are clearly added on.
The lists of succession indicate other interesting features as
well. The descent list of the Yadus is not given in the chapter on
origins, even though they are related to the Pūrus, and Kṛṣṇa is
important to the epic. Despite Yayāti’s centrality in the lineage,
he does not marry into kṣatriya clans. Devayānī was the daughter
of a Bhṛgu brāhmaṇa and Śarmiṣṭha was of dānava origin. The
Pūrus are described as kṣatriyas despite their ancestry from asura
114 1.80.12–15.
115 1.89.34–42.
116 Ṛgveda, 7.18, 7.33.6.
The Mahābhārata 177
rākṣasas. The descendants of Yadu, however, are not given the
same status. Their descendants include the Vṛṣṇis, the somewhat
inferior clan of Kṛṣṇa, and the Bhojas, the clan of Kuntī, the
mother of the Pāṇḍavas.117 The people of Saurashtra in western
India where Dvārakā, the main centre of the Vṛṣṇis was located,
are elsewhere referred to as sankīrṇa yonayāḥ, namely, of mixed
and therefore low caste.118
There is also a seeming difference in political status. Śiśupāla,
the rājā of the Cedis, taunts Kṛṣṇa for not being a rājā or a priest.119
He is merely a clan member of the Vṛṣṇis. In Buddhist sources
the Cedis are also chiefs but their status is high.120 Status seems
to have been generally on an uneven keel and could vary from
text to text, depending on the author’s patron.
The genealogical data is an attempt to provide origins and an
identity to the protagonists of the story over a period of time
through pinning together the variant fragments and connecting
them through legends. The genealogies were doubtless worked
over repeatedly and updated. They reflect a variety of concerns
about the past.
Some of these descent lines may have been collaterals which
were also shuffled into a single line of descent. Some segments
relate to other peoples who were amalgamated, confederated, or
in some way associated and therefore brought into the genealogy.
There was also the likelihood of the invention of names to fill out
and lengthen the period of the genealogy, and thus also create a
greater distance in time between the events and the editing of the
epic.121 One of the techniques used for such lengthening—the
addition of spurinyms—is evident in the longer genealogy,
where there is a succession of unlikely names ending in ­ayus after
Ayus, or in ­yāti after Yayāti. The insistence on a genealogy and
latching heroes onto genealogies is a clinging to a lineage­based
society, since genealogies are central to lineage. Reckoning by
117 7.118.14–15.
118 Baudhāyana Dharmasūtra, 1.2.13.
119 2.34.1–10.
120 Cetīya Jātaka, no. 422, in The Jātaka.
121 D.P. Henige, The Chronology of Oral Tradition; J. Vansina, Oral Tradi-
tion as History.
178 The Past Before Us
genealogies also introduces a linear concept of time, and this
becomes almost contrapuntal to another innovation in the epic,
which is the description of time as cyclic.
The lineage­based system drew on kinship, but the descent is
marred by breaks and therefore it is necessary to knit geneal ogies
together and present a seamless succession. Adoptions and mar­
riage alliances help in this. Repeated patterns in the geneal ogies
are giveaways of such attempts. Thus the figure five occurs repeat­
edly in the descent list. The action begins effectively with the five
sons of Yayāti and closes with the five Pāṇḍavas. The succession,
although it goes to the grandson of Arjuna, is shrouded in a myth
of his being revived as a dead foetus. Is this a cover­up for a dis­
juncture in the lineage and power being appropriated by another
clan or another kinsman?
Where new settlements are involved, there again Uparicara has
five sons who settle in Central India and Bali has five sons who
establish themselves in the east. This is reminiscent of terms such
as the pañcajanāḥ, or the pañcavīras associated with the Vṛṣṇis,
or names such as Pañcāla. Within the five there is the additional
pattern of two wives, one bearing three sons and the other two, as
in the case of the wives of Yayāti and Pāṇḍu. Genealogies are also
useful in rights to territory, as in the claims of the Kauravas and the
Pāṇḍavas to descent from identical genealogically attested clans.
The irony is that if blood ties were crucial to inheritance, then
neither the Kauravas nor the Pāṇḍavas had rights of inheritance
to the territory of the Pūru lineage.
The authenticity of the descent lists is not of primary impor­
tance: only a modicum of authenticity would have sufficed. What
are being represented are the social and political systems of clan
societies. The attempt is to capture a past that was different from
the present as reflected in legends linked to genealogies. They are,
significantly, often those narratives and ākhyānas which might
have had a bearing on the eventual working out of a perception
of the past. For example, the story of the Flood, first briefly men­
tioned in the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, is repeated in the Mahābhārata
but with some change.122
122 3.185ff.
The Mahābhārata 179
The fish orders Manu to place the seven seers (saptaṛṣi, Ursa
Major) and the seeds of all creatures in the ship and embark on the
sea. The fish announces that it will tie the ship’s rope to its horn.123
It will navigate the ship through the deluge, mooring it safely
to the highest peak of the Himalaya. This it does and, when the
flood subsides, Manu disembarks. The fish, having declared itself
as being the god Brahmā, then disappears. Manu proceeds with
his asceticism and creation is reborn. This is somewhat different
from the earlier Vedic version and is even closer to the Meso­
potamian story.124 It comes to be seen as seminal to the beginnings
of history.
The story of Purūravas and Urvaśī, unlike the version in the
Vedic corpus, is not sympathetic to Purūravas.125 That of Devāpi
and Śantanu also changes from the Vedic version.126 The parallel
between the story and the succession in the Kuru line is evident. It
also reinforces the statement that there is rainfall in the kingdom
if the king rules justly,127 or that in the absence of a rājā there is
no rain. By extension, the “rain­maker” signalled a person of im­
mense power and legitimacy where kingship is not established.
The story of Śunaḥśepa receives a bare mention, although the
latching on of clans remains a feature of the epic.128
References to Vena in the Ṛgveda praise him as an early rājā.129
There is no reference to Vena being evil and therefore deposed.
But the Mahābhārata has an elaborate story about the two sons
born from his body. This becomes a prototype story to explain
the rejection of forest­dwellers and the acceptance of settled com­
munities. Vena was made rājā by the ṛṣis, but he gradually took
to evil ways and did not perform the required rituals.130 The ṛṣis
123 The eventual size of the fish and the horn is suggestive of the narwhal,
of the whale family, and the male grows a spiral horn. But these are generally
limited to the Arctic waters. M. Allaby (ed.), The Oxford Dictionary of Natural
History, entry under “Monodontidae”.
124 W.G. Lambert and A.R. Millard, Atra-hasis.
125 1.70.16ff.
126 5.147.16ff.
127 1.99.40ff., 1.163.14–22.
128 13.3.6–8.
129 Ṛgveda, 10.93.14, 8.9.10, 10.148.5, 10.171.3.
130 12.59.94ff.
180 The Past Before Us
decided to do away with him by piercing him with the sacred kuśa
grass. His death resulted in a condition where there was no ruler,
a condition of chaos (arājya), which was unacceptable. So they
churned his left thigh and there emerged a short, dark, ugly man
the colour of antimony, with bloodshot eyes and thick lips whom
they named Niṣāda and banished to the forest. Niṣāda, together
with Śabara and Pulinda, became generic names for people of the
forest treated as outside the social pale.
They then churned the right arm of the dead Vena (in contrast
to the left thigh earlier) and there sprang up a tall and handsome
man, Pṛthu, fit to be a rājā. The ṛṣis came to an agreement with
him: he would be allowed to rule provided he observed the appro­
priate rituals and laws of varṇāśrama-dharma preventing the
mixing of castes, and that he would punish the unrighteous. Pṛthu
agreed and made a successful rājā, introducing cattle rearing and
cultivation. The earth was so pleased with him that she took his
name, Pṛthvī.
The agreement was between the brāhmaṇas and the kṣatriya,
and no others were consulted. The initiative was with the former,
both in the killing of Vena—using a sacred object—as well as in
the banishing of Niṣāda and the appointing of Pṛthu. But what is
also emphasized is the separation between those that are banish­
ed to the forest and those that are part of the settled community.
The idiom of the settlement (grāma) and the forest (araṇya) is
reiterated.
Such stories suggest that ākhyānas were known to the oral
tradition or were picked up and refashioned as required. The dif­
fer ences in the Vedic and epic versions also reflect the interests
of authors who were not identical, nor was the historical context.
There may have been a mutual borrowing, or else a common
source.
Mentioning shifts in location and referring back to earlier loca ­
tions can introduce a historical perspective. Migrations, ini ­
tially notional, can be given a geographical base after a passage
of time. Migration is also linked to exile. The geographical focus
of the epic is the area around Hastināpura and Indraprastha and
the forests in the vicinity, although exile and skirmishes inevita­
bly move the location to more distant parts. The main line, that
The Mahābhārata 181
002
0
sertemoliK
E
G
A
N Ganga
R
A
Y
L
A noS
A
M Ganga
I
a r a k o
r a
m
Ind
E
us
A T Beas
H
Yamuna labm ahC
e
g n a
R a y h
K R d G n iV Tapi
h
s
u
mulehJ banehC ivaR
jeltuS
adam
raN
K
u
d
Kabul
egnaR
nam
ia
n lu
S
i H
sudnI
dnamleH
AJOBMAK
LUBAK
ARĀHDNAG
AT(cid:115)T(cid:115)ARA
.
ARDAM
ARTESKURUK
(cid:115)
arupānitsaH
IHLED ahtsarpardnI
ALĀCÑAP
IDEC
AHDAGAM
ATAKLOK
ākarāvD
ART.S.ĀRUAS
idanahaM
seitsanyD
dna
,snalC
,secalP
tnatropmI
eroM
eht
fo
snoitacoL
:2
pa4M
retpahC
,2
paM
182 The Past Before Us
of the Kurus, occupied the watershed and the Upper Doab, and
their neighbours to the east and south-east were the Pañcālas.
Kuntī was of the clan of Bhoja settled in Rajasthan, and close to
the Vṛṣṇi and Andhaka.
The listing of places conquered by the brothers of Yudhiṣṭhira
at the time of the digvijaya is partly accurate and partly fantasy,
incorporating the place names known to those times, and the
dispersal of the clans even if not precisely. The ranking of the
clans and their rājās in terms of the tribute which they bring sub­
sequent to the digvijaya indicates the nature of their economies
and status.131
Mentioning Jambudvīpa (the land of the rose-apple tree) has
no geographical exactitude but envisions an ideal space inhab­
ited by a variety of people. Recognizable place names give it a
semblance of geography and link the actual space with imaginary
space. Interestingly, in referring to peoples, tribes, communities,
the digvijaya makes no differentiation between ārya and anārya.
It gives the names of the peoples conquered, and only some are
listed as dasyus.132 Nor is there a specification in identifying the
mlecchas, which is used as a collective word.133
There is a scatter of references to other clans, such as that of
Gāndhārī, wife of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, who lived in the north-west, in
the region which was known to history as Gandhāra; or Mādrī,
the wife of Pāṇḍu, of the Madra clan located in the Punjab; or
the Āraṭṭa who inhabited the borderlands and did not observe the
dharma.
In the region of the Vindhyas and the Narmada were the Cedis,
and to the east was the powerful ruler of Magadha, Jarāsandha.
Ambiguity regarding relations with Magadha is a marked feature
of the politics of the epic. Magadha being part of the eastern region
was different from the western Ganges plain; and state systems
in the form of kingdoms were beginning to emerge in the eastern
region, and Magadha was pre­eminent among these.
The kingdom of Magadha was a threat to the gaṇa-saṅghas. Was
131 R. Thapar, “Some Aspects of the Economic Data in the Mahābhārata”, in
idem, Cultural Pasts, 630–46.
132 2.24.14–16.
133 2.28.44–50, 2.29.15–16.
The Mahābhārata 183
Jarāsandha seen as seeking to expand and consolidate Magadha
at the expense of the chiefdoms? The segment on Jarāsandha
is thought to be late.134 The enmity between Magadha and the
Vṛṣṇis in the epic may reflect the rise of Magadha from the time
of Bimbisāra and his son Ajātaśatru.
There are echoes of the history of Magadha in this episode
which recall narratives involving its early rulers, Bimbisāra and
Ajātaśatru, from other sources. Yudhiṣṭhira is referred to as Ajāta-
śatru,135 possibly intended literally as an epithet. Initially disliked
by the Buddhists and the Jainas, Ajātaśatru was later claimed as a
patron of the Buddha. Rajgir was the capital of these kings prior
to the establishment of Pāṭaliputra under the Nandas. Jarāsandha
and his allies sow dissension among the kṣatriya lineages,136 echo­
ing the story in the Buddhist sources of Vassakara, the minister
of Ajātaśatru, sowing dissension among the Vṛjji clans.137 The
episode involving Jarāsandha possibly reflects aspects of contem­
porary events.138 Were contemporary events being imposed on data
of earlier times? Kṛṣṇa, as adviser to the Pāṇḍavas, suggests a way
of getting rid of the ruler by assassination rather than conquest.
The genealogy attempts not only to knit the other kṣatriyas
and almost­kṣatriyas into a series of relationships, it also sets out
the geography of the time before the war. In a comparison of the
status of clans and groups mentioned in both the Vedic corpus and
the Mahābhārata, there are discrepancies or changes in status.
Migration is also linked to the notion of exile.
Exile, apart from being a useful bardic device for prolonging
the story, introduced descriptions of new areas as they came onto
the geographical horizon of the narrative. New peoples, when
incorporated into the epic and located geographically, could ac­
quire a myth of origin and links to established clans. Exile was
134 J. Brockington, “Jārasandha of Magadha, Mbh. 2.15–22”, 73ff.; A. Hilte­
beitel, Rethinking the Mahābhārata, 5ff., 73ff.
135 2.12.8.
136 Mahābhārata, 2.13.6ff.; G.P. Malalasekera, Dictionary of Pali Proper
Names, 31ff.
137 Dīgha Nikāya Aṭṭakathā, 2.72ff.; Sumaṅgalavilāsinī, 2.522ff.
138 2.15–22; J. Brockington, “Jarāsandha of Magadha”, 73ff.; A. Hiltebeitel,
Rethinking the Mahābhārata, 5ff.
184 The Past Before Us
generally to living in the forest, which was in itself a counterpoint
to the settlement and therefore an indicator of distance. It was also
the habitat of “the other” society, regarded as alien and inferior, but
nevertheless feared: peoples who were seen, or else deliberately
pro jected because of animosity, as still distant from civilization
in the perception of the society of the heroes.
The dichotomy of settlement and forest, first referred to in the
Vedic corpus,139 is reiterated in the epic. Unlike the specificity of
the settlements, the forest in the epics becomes the central space,
geographically vague, but the backdrop to important happenings.
This is where the authors could locate the semi­imagined “Other”
and where the fantasies about the wider world could be played
out. The forest in the Sanskrit epics parallels the “wine­dark sea”
in Homer.
There is here a merging and mixing of peoples and cultures of
separate origins. The Mahābhārata becomes the perceived history
of various clans at different levels of the social hierarchy, evident
in the observances and political forms of these clans. A move
towards a clearer historical perception would require reordering
this material—as happened later in the Viṣṇu Purāṇa.
7. Chiefdoms and Incipient Kingship
The broadly differentiated earlier narrative section, and later di­
dactic sections of the text hint at historical intention. The world
of kṣatriyas is concerned with the ethics and values of the heroic
society, whereas the latter tries to imprint the normative models
of the brahmanical social codes wherein kingship is pivotal. The
juxtaposition is of two kinds of societies, differentiated through
discourses and some tampering with the narrative, but not by a
radical restructuring of the text. The perception and use of the past
is important to the construction of a historical consciousness.
In clan society, identity is through lineage, actual or fictive;
kinship; claiming to be kṣatriyas; instant wealth comes from raids,
and more slowly through agro­pastoralism; and the yajña is pivotal
139 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 13.2.4.1; C. Malamoud, Cooking the World, 74–91;
R. Thapar, “Perceiving the Forest: Early India”, 1–16.
The Mahābhārata 185
to belief and community. Clans tend to break away and migrate
when the pressures of population and competition for resources
become too great. The power of the rājā also comes from impli­
cit control over drought, famine, and disease—all disastrous for
agro­pastoralism.140
Lineage links had a direct connection with two aspects of politi­
cal power—legitimacy and territory—claims to both being largely
based on kin connections: hence the importance of genealogies
and the need to continually reiterate them, even if it sometimes
meant inventing fictive connections.
Equality of status is not absolute among the Vṛṣṇis, the Kurus,
and those who are members of the gaṇa-saṅghas. The least equal
among them were the dāsas and dāsīs, domestic and household
slaves who were employed to a lesser degree in either pastoral or
agricultural production. Reciprocity gradually becomes charac­
teristic of the economy, symbolized in gift­giving.
Political forms are not sharply differentiated. The epic seems
to veer from pre­state chiefship to incipient kingship, indicating
that perhaps the earlier epic was initially put together in times of
chiefships and then moved to the twilight period of transition be­
tween the two; and that the later interpolations draw from the more
complex societies of established kingdoms. Advice on the benefits
of kingship is sporadic and scattered. The Śānti and Anuśāsana
parvans are meant to imprint and enlarge these advantages and
negate other political systems. The discussion on kingship is pro­
jected more at the conceptual level than with reference to histori­
cal examples. This may not have been the case with clans.
Elements of chiefship can be recognized in the functioning
of various clans: for instance, in the saṅgha (assembly) of the
Andhaka-Vṛṣṇis who are said to be constituted of eighteen
rājakulas (ruling families); the kula of Kṛṣṇa-Vāsudeva had a
subdivision of eighteen lesser groups and of eighteen vratas.141
The saṅgha was governed by the rājanya vṛddha (elders of the
140 R. Thapar, From Lineage to State.
141 2.13.35; vrata has been translated as “bands” and as “soldiers”. The num­
bers should not be taken too literally, since eighteen in particular was a frequently
used number, almost notional, with little attempt at accuracy.
186 The Past Before Us
ruling clans) and were divided into other groups, such as the varga,
pakṣa, gṛhya, gaṇa, and dvanda, generally headed by a śreṣṭha (the
one acknowledged as the best). The continued existence of such
groups is referred to even in the later sections, where the working
of the gaṇa is described.142 It is said that only dissension could
destroy its corporate and collective working. This is precisely
what happens in the narrative when the Vṛṣṇis attack each other.
Sowing dissension is recommended by Kauṭilya as a method of
bringing down a gaṇa-saṅgha.143 The gaṇa assembly consisted
of members of the rājakula, and the consensus of kinsmen was
crucial to decisions. Succession could still be disputed among
kinsmen, as in the case of the collateral lines of the Kauravas
and the Pāṇḍavas.
The duality of kṣatriya and non­kṣatriya was maintained by the
access of the former to resources, and to status through birth and
by marriage alliances. Legends of birth and marriage covered up
the transgressions. The kṣatriya identity focused on the clan and
the household, over and above which were mores, customs, and
social obligations.
The link with power also lies in descent from father to son,
ensuring the continuation of lineage, this being basic to heroic
society. At a symbolic level, the weakness of the link between
Pāṇḍu and his sons makes them almost subliminal personali­
ties, continually on the edge of definition. Tied into the notion
of succession was primogeniture, the violation of which is one
of the essentials on which the narrative hinges. The “disqualified
eldest” becomes a recurring theme.144 The household, which holds
together lineage and property, is disrupted in exile.
The activities of the heroes lie at the intersection of two econo­
mies, the pastoral and the agricultural. These are areas of politi ­
cal confrontation. Birth into a clan gave rights to participation in
clan ownership of animals and land. Encroaching into existing
settlements, or clearing forests for agriculture, or claiming pasture­
142 12.108.6–31.
143 Arthaśāstra, 11.1.
144 J.A.B. van Buitenen, The Mahābhārata, I, xviiff. The practice has ante­
cedents in the replacement of Yadu by Pūru.
The Mahābhārata 187
lands, could be conflicting and could require the need to defend
territories and rights. The frontier is often the forest, a no­man’s
land with which the relationship is never neutral and in which
the first claim is established when the land is settled. It is also the
fantasy world inhabited by demons. Frontier ecologies have their
own code of ethics derived from local practices.
Cattle raids are fair play, but if the raider is caught he is liable to
be enslaved or killed—as would any predator. Single combat takes
on the quality of a hunt, without recourse to allies and armies. This
increases the urgency of the action, which is often more exagger­
ated than required. Pasturing and swidden agriculture need large
territories because returns come from extending the area rather
than intensifying the investment and labour. Larger territories
are more difficult to conquer and protect than the compact arable
land of plough cultivation. Thus, territory was claimed preferably
through kinship ties and alliances.
A distinction is maintained between gathering and producing
economies. The former remains important, judging by the tribute
brought by a range of people prior to the rājasūya sacrifice. Pro-
perty can be tangible—herds of cattle and horse, gold, grain, and
other material objects; it can also be intangible—authority over
a household and those both dependent on it and labouring for it,
such as kinsmen, women, servants, and slaves. The heroes lived off
the labour of those regarded as lesser men and women, namely,the
śūdras and the dāsas and dāsīs, male and female slaves, all shad­
owy figures in the wings. Aliens were sometimes also reduced to
this status. When Yudhiṣṭhira stakes the wealth of the Pāṇḍavas
in the game of dice, all these categories are included.
In such a society, gift­giving becomes, as earlier noted, a form
of circulating wealth. The more one gives the more one receives:
this was axiomatic. The rājasūya was an occasion for extensive
gift­giving. The lists of items echo the earlier exaggeration of the
dāna-stuti hymns. The new items are elephants and textiles and in­
creased numbers of slaves.145 When Yudhiṣṭhira stakes his wealth,
he stakes his janapada (territory), but agricultural lands are not
145 R. Thapar, “Some Aspects of the Economic Data in the Mahābhārata”, in
idem, Cultural Pasts, 630–46.
188 The Past Before Us
mentioned.146 The ritual context makes the gift significant as an
item of exchange, of establishing status and alliances between
clans, and a mechanism of integration. The gift also provides poli­
tical legitimacy, even if tenuous. The rājasūya is counterposed to
the major event which succeeds it, namely, the game of dice. By
losing this game, the Pāṇḍavas are deprived of their wealth and
status. Draupadī’s questioning of Yudhiṣṭhira’s right to place her
as a stake actually has a wider implicit significance related to the
legitimacy of the Pāṇḍavas to rule after they have lost.
The kṣatriya receives prestations in the form of voluntary tri­
bute from the others and is expected to give this wealth as gifts
or dāna. The kṣatriya’s prime function, apart from protecting his
people, is to make gifts, especially to brāhmaṇas. This continues to
be underlined even in the later sections of the epic.147 Gift-giving in
this form carried the germ of what was to become a redistributive
economy, characteristic of kingdoms, where the redistribution was
more formally organized: the revenue was systematically collected
and then spent on the structures that supported the state system.
This required the accumulation of wealth. However, the major
sacrificial rituals were inimical to such accumulation. This im­
passe could only be broken either through a far greater access to
wealth where the surplus remained with the yajamāna, accompa­
nied by a new concept of wealth, namely, immovable and perma­
nent property in land; or through a decrease in the performance
of rituals. In either case, the nature of the kṣatriya’s dependence
on the brāhmaṇa had to be formulated differently.
These changes began to take place from about the fifth century
bc in the middle Ganges plain. Rice cultivation in this region,
despite its requirement of co­operative labour and irrigation, pro ­
duced a big yield, which increased the availability of wealth to
the rājā as yajamāna. So too did the introduction of new techno ­
logies.148 The efficacy of the yajña was questioned in some Upani-
ṣads and in the teachings of heterodox sects. There was now
146 R. Thapar, “The Historian and the Epic”, in idem, Cultural Pasts,
613–29.
147 13.7.14, 13.8.9; cf. Manu’s Code of Law, 7.85.
148 R. Thapar, From Lineage to State, 70ff.
The Mahābhārata 189
an interest in the possibility of belief and activity that required
neither patron, nor priest, nor ritual, nor gift­giving.149 The change
from cattle wealth, and a sharing of rights in clan land to private
ownership of land in the context of kingdoms,150 led gradually to a
changed situation—as reflected in the later books of the epic. The
propagation of a social ethic that did not require yajñas but em­
phasized the individual’s social actions, tended to marginalize
sacrificial rituals and questioned codes based on emerging caste
identities.
Kingship seems to have been an adjunct to the core society of
the Mahābhārata. But the brahmanical concept of the divine sanc­
tion of power was being challenged by Buddhist and Jaina ideas.
This was a major ideological concern in the post­Mauryan period,
probably parallel with the later additions to the Mahābhārata. As
such, it was essential to visualizing a past without kingship and
then justifying the brahmanical definition of the change.
The transition from chiefship to incipient kingship can be
seen by comparing the contexts of the Sabhā and Śānti parvans.
That some parts of the epic refer to an earlier society is indicated
by social norms that differ substantially from those prescribed in
the Śānti and Anuśasana parvans, generally following the codes
of the Dharmaśāstras. This becomes particularly evident in the
varied forms of marriage and in the way women are depicted.
Some social practices as narrated would have been unacceptable
to kṣatriyas conforming to the normative prescriptions.
The Pāṇḍavas seem to digress quite frequently from the norma­
tive prescriptions. Pāṇḍu’s marriage with Mādrī did not require
a dowry, being of the asura category in which bride­wealth is
given.151 The Madras are said to be part of a group in the north­
west, including the Āraṭṭas and the Bāhlikas and sometimes
the Gāndhāras and Sindhu-Sauvīras as well, who do not observe
the dharma and whose women are relatively free.152 Women
149 R. Thapar, “Sacrifice, Surplus and the Soul”, in idem, Cultural Pasts,
809–31.
150 R. Thapar, From Lineage to State, 116ff.
151 1.105.5ff.
152 Mahābhārata, 8.30.52–9.
190 The Past Before Us
such as Kuntī, Gāndhārī, and Draupadī are fiercely independent.
Marriage forms such as the svayamvara, where the woman chooses
a husband from a limited few,153 and the gandharva, by mutual
consent, are regarded as appropriate only to kṣatriyas. Pāṇḍu’s
sons are all fathered by deities, a contingency not included in the
marriage codes. This does not make them into incarnations of
gods, a different status used in later times.
The fraternal polyandry of the Pāṇḍavas was unusual. It is ques-
tioned in the epic.154 Elaborate and curious explanations follow,
involving deities. The brothers married other individual wives
and the sons from these marriages are more visible in the narrative.
Arjuna has a rākṣasa form of marriage by abducting his bride, the
sister of Kṛṣṇa, from which marriage the lineage continues. The
objection of the Vṛṣṇi clans was to Arjuna abducting Subhadrā
and not that it was a cross­cousin marriage, practised fairly wide­
ly.155 This was despite the disapproval of the normative texts.156
Was Bhīṣma’s abduction of the brides for Vicitravīrya a rākṣasa
form of marriage for them?157 Draupadī questioning the right of
Yudhiṣṭhira to stake her in the game of dice—when he had already
lost his independence and that of the Pāṇḍavas to Duryodhana—
was a turning point in the story. This contradicts the subservient
position of women in the normative texts.
153 1.211.21. It is not always listed among the eight recognized forms of
marriage. It becomes a feature of courtly literature in later times, often more
symbolic than actual, and a stage prop to romantic exploits.
154 2.61.35, 1.146.34.
155 A detailed study, The People of India, carried out by the Anthropological
Survey of India, provides evidence of the frequency of cross­cousin marriage
in North India among the lower levels of the social hierarchy. This would
suggest that cross­cousin marriage has not been limited to South India. The
Dharmaśāstra opposition to it may have been brāhmaṇa hostility to a custom
practised by those of lesser status: quite apart from the inherent objection to
marrying a close kin, which was seen as incestuous.
156 One text describes cross­cousin marriage as causing a loss of caste or
a sin: Baudhāyana Dharmasūtra, 1.2.4.6; that it was a custom peculiar to the
South: Baudhāyana Dharmasūtra, 1.2.2–3ff.; and that it is forbidden in Manu’s
Code of Law, 11.172–3. Kumarila, writing much later, tries to argue that Arjuna’s
marriage to Subhadrā was not a cross-cousin marriage: P.V. Kane, History of
Dharmasastras, vol. II.1, 459–60.
157 C.R. Deshpande, Transmission of the Mahābhārata Tradition, 22.
The Mahābhārata 191
Among the Vṛṣṇis, there is a frequency of cross-cousin marriage
with the daughters of maternal uncles and paternal aunts.158 The
role of Śakuni is significant in advising Duryodhana in the game
of dice and actually throwing for him, for Śakuni is Duryodhana’s
mother’s brother, and but for him the Kauravas were unlikely to
have won the game.159 The range in forms of marriage and result­
ing kin relations was probably an attempt to acknowledge variants
and make them acceptable. Such variations, current in earlier
societies or in other societies, were validated by their introduction
into the family of the heroes.
The necessity for kinsmen to stand together, particularly on the
battlefield, is repeatedly emphasized.160 It is kinsmen who take
decisions in the sabhā, perform the functions of administration,
and are crucial decision­makers, as for example in the decision
of the Kauravas to exile the Pāṇḍavas.
Beyond the kinsmen was the jana, where behaviour is con­
ditioned by an audience wider than just the close kin. Thus, the
decision on the part of Yudhiṣṭhira and the Pāṇḍavas to hold a
rājasūya sacrifice, or the description which Kṛṣṇa gives of the de­
feat of the Vṛṣṇis at the hands of Jarāsandha of Magadha and their
migration to Dvārakā, involved the jana. Clan assemblies were
also involved in choosing their rājās, as in the cases of Kuru and
Janamejaya.161
The meaning of the word rājā gradually undergoes change. In
the Śānti parvan, the root of the word rājā is said to be *rañj, to
please, to be accepted as the one who established dharma, a mean­
ing that carried little connotation of political authority.162 This is an
incorrect etymology, the word deriving from *raj, to shine. Except
where the constituents of the state as a kingdom are mentioned as
part of the narrative, it might be more appropriate to assume that
rājā should be taken as chief and not king.
The references to cattle raids in the narrative would point to
158 These practices have been explained as due to the South Indian recensions
of the text: T. Trautmann, Dravidian Kinship, 316ff.
159 2.45.36, 2.53ff.
160 3.232.1–5.
161 1.89.42ff., 1.40.6.
162 12.59.125ff., 12.56.36ff., 12.137.103ff.
192 The Past Before Us
societies still associated with herding. These were well­organized
raids lasting many weeks. The term gāviṣṭhi (desire for cattle) is
used for skirmishes in the Vedic corpus.163 The ghoṣa-yātra, in the
Māhabhārata, an expedition to brand cattle, is another source of
potential conflict between the Kauravas and the Pāṇḍavas since
they personally attend to this activity—an unlikely act for esta­
blished royalty.164
The insistence on Yudhiṣṭhira being the dharmarāja, both
because he is the son of the deity Dharma and because the title
implies that he follows the dharma, would point to the gradual
significance of kingship and its association with dharma, an as­
sociation which becomes very clear in the sections added later,
by which time kingship was becoming the norm. However, the
disestablishing of the wicked rājā is a theme more familiar from
the narrative sections.
8. Defining Kingship
The Śānti and Anuśāsana parvans are discourses on various
as pects of governance such as rāja-dharma, or the origin and
principles of kingship; daṇḍa-dharma, or coercion, punishment,
and armed strength; āpad-dharma, or governing in times of dis­
tress; varṇāśrama-dharma, or the duties and obligations of various
castes, particularly those of the kṣatriyas, and their relations with
brāhmaṇas; vyavahāra-dharma, or the rules of correct behavi­
our; dāna-dharma, or how to give gifts, to whom, when and what
to give; and mokṣa-dharma, or the liberation of the soul from the
cycle of rebirth. The discussions on these subjects also mark a
change from earlier times, when these would not have been so
relevant to earlier societies, governance, and belief.
āpad-dharma recognizes that laws are flexible in time and
space and have to be modified according to whether the times
are normal or not.165 Abnormal times would be when the other
163 Taittirīya Brāhmaṇa, 1.8.4.
164 3.224–36. If the later tradition of the epic genre in India provides a clue,
the narratives of pastoral heroes such as Ālha, Pābujī, and Ghāzi Miyān are the
epic forms of medieval centuries. Associated with these are the large numbers
of hero­stones, many of which memorialize a hero who died defending the
cattle of the village.
165 12.128.11–13.
The Mahābhārata 193
aspects of dharma are not being observed as defined. This could
be a reflection of the visibility of heterodox sects of Buddhism
and Jainism, not to mention the memory of Aśoka’s dhamma
with his definition of social ethics being so different to that of the
varṇāśrama-dharma.166 There is a reiteration of the message of
the Gītā that the kṣatriya as the ruler has on occasion to kill, else
he cannot carry out his dharma as a ruler.167 In the same sense,
the accumulation of wealth essential to kingship is necessary to
the king,168 a subject not referred to earlier.
In order to reiterate the necessity of kingship, Bhīṣma narrates
the rise of the system. There was chaos in human society as a result
of error, desire, and passion. This frightened the deities who were,
in addition, bereft now of offerings that came to them from the
performance of sacrifices. The gods appealed to Viṣṇu to appoint
a ruler, and he did so. A few generations later came Veṇa, and the
story of Niṣāda and Pṛthu is repeated, but with some additions that
link it to the itihāsa tradition. Pṛthu appointed Śukra, a Bhṛgu, to
be his priest. From his sacrificial fire there sprang the māgadha
and the sūta, the first bards who immediately began reciting the
eulogies of Pṛthu,169 which had prime importance. The story points
to a link between the Bhṛgu and both the rājā and the sūta, such
that it would validate the Bhṛgu reformulating the composition
of the sūta pertaining to the activities of the rājā.
It is said that a brāhmaṇa can only be considered learned if,
apart from the Vedas and Upaniṣads, he also knows the ākhyāna.170
The more the interpolations, the more significant the text for mo­
bilizing the past to the needs of the present. The interpolations
were tied to the ideology of power, which made the text polemical.
It was still a portrait of the ideal kṣatriya, but he was no longer
essentially the kṣatriya of the gaṇa-saṅghas, he was now gradually
becoming the kṣatriya of the rājya (kingship).
With the coming of kingship, institutions begin to differ from
166 J.L. Fitzgerald, Introduction to Book 12, Śāntiparvan, Part I, The
Mahābhārata, vol. 7, 109–28.
167 12.128.25–35. The debate on war and peace in the Udyoga parvan is
discussed in A. Malinar, Bhagavad-Gītā, 38ff.
168 12.120.30–5.
169 12.59.118.
170 1.2.235.
194 The Past Before Us
their earlier forms. The existence of the state and kingship is as­
sumed in the advice that Bhīṣma gives to Yudhiṣṭhira. The theory
of the state is crystallized in other texts in the concept of the seven
limbs or elements (saptāṅga/saptaprakṛti) constituting the state.171
Yudhiṣṭhira in asking “what is a king” requires Bhīṣma to give
a version of the theory of the state: a king is the single man who
is powerful and exceptional.172 His right to coerce and punish is
conceded. He is assisted by ministers who need not be kinsmen
but constitute the royal court located in a fortified urban centre.
Revenue comes to the treasury as taxes and is redistributed through
the maintenance of an army and administration, and extensive gift­
giving. Punishment is essential to good administration.173
It is said that in the earliest times there were no varṇas. With
the falling off in tapas (ascetic austerities), the four varṇas came
into being and subsequently there was a mixing of the four which
resulted in the many low mixed castes—the sankīrṇa jātis.174
There is a more detailed formulation of varṇa society in which
the role and function of the four varṇas are stated in terms similar
to those of the Dharmaśāstras. Varṇāśrama-dharma is defined
as the obligations of each varṇa, and, together with the Vedas, as
the foundation of society.175 The interface between the varṇas is
thought to be necessary and is clearly defined, with the brāhmaṇa
advising on rules of conduct for all. The welfare of the brāhmaṇa
is now a major concern for the king.
The transition is apparent from the comparison between the
kingless state and the need for a king.176 The king takes exalted
titles, such as samrāṭ, cakravartin, adhirāja, but the reality behind
these titles is seldom so exalted. Primogeniture is the preferred
succession; where this is not possible a legend covers the break.177
There is still a concession, however, to subjects being allowed to
kill a rājā, although the actual killing is done by the brāhmaṇas,
171 Arthaśāstra, 6.1; Manu’s Code of Law, 8—rājadharma.
172 12.59.5ff.
173 12.70.
174 12.285.1ff.
175 12.60.6ff.
176 12.59.120ff., 12.67.2–17.
177 1.80.12–15, 1.107.24–7, 5.147.16–26.
The Mahābhārata 195
as in the story of Vena.178 The treasury is the root of the state—
kośamūla hi rājanaḥ.179
The explanations for the establishing of the office of rājā as in­
cipient kingship are varied and narrate the history of the concept.
It is said that people in a state of anarchy agreed among themselves
to observe certain rules, but failed to do so. Therefore anarchy
increased. They then requested a god to give them a clone who
would rule and protect them and whom they could worship.180
Manu was requested, but he initially refused. He was persuaded
when it was agreed that a percentage of the produce and a quar­
ter of the merit of the people would accrue to him. (In another
version, the king was required to take upon himself a quarter of
their sins.181) In return, he was to protect the people and maintain
the rules of caste. There is therefore a contract in which Manu
is answerable only to the gods, since the intervention of deity
establishes kingship. Those who claim to represent deities claim
to know how the king should function.
The story of the origins of kingship in the epic parallels the
contractual element in the Buddhist narrative, the contract having
been made sometime in the remote past. There are also similarities
in the process leading to kingship. But the Mahābhārata initiates it
with an appeal to Brahmā for someone to govern who would draw
upon the varṇāśrama-dharma. He appoints Manu, taking a cue
from the Vedas.182 The king is viewed as a deity in human form
when he is described as mahtī devatā hyeṣā nararūpeṇa tiṣṭhati.183
In the case of Yudhiṣṭhira, divinity is reinforced by a divine pat-
ern ity, the deity Dharma.
Protection becomes a central element. Loss of property and
confusion in the social order are the reasons for the creation of a
state. The Dharmaśāstras emphasize daṇḍa as essential to political
power. This was not merely a reference to external aggression but
also to controlling those who resisted assertions of power.
178 12.59.98–100.
179 12.119.16, 12.128.35.
180 12.59.94, 67.20–9, 69.24–5, 88.10–16.
181 12.76.6–8.
182 12.56.22–4.
183 12.68.40.
196 The Past Before Us
That the origin of kingship was being debated is evident from
there being more than one explanation. These explanations point
to its emerging historically. Another story maintains that, to begin
with, dharma prevailed in society, but this situation changed when
the asuras destroyed it. The resulting loss of utopia made daṇḍa
necesary.184 Who were these asuras? Were they literally believed
to be demons, or was it a synonym for prevailing heterodoxies,
which in the post­Mauryan period received extensive patronage?
The right of the government to exercise coercion is reiterated in
another statement: when human society began, neither rājyam
nor daṇḍa were required because people protected each other.185
Daṇḍa is now necessary for maintaining law and protecting pro­
perty. The abolition of daṇḍa would lead to total chaos and destruc­
tion, as would the absence of a king.186 The legitimacy of kingship
is now extended from lineage to the wielding of daṇḍa.
The theory of mātsyanyāya is quoted, that in a condition of
drought the big fish in a pond eat the little fish. Therefore, in a
condition of anarchy, where there are no rājās, the big consume
the small, a condition in which neither wives nor wealth can
be enjoyed. To avoid this injustice, kingship was necessary and
the king protected the weak from the overbearing as well as the
aggressors.187 Kingship is the solution to anarchy.
These conditions are distanced from the narrative sections
which contain the occasional reference to prajā, prakṛti, and
puravāsino janāḥ (people), participating in the choice of a rājā,
or the friendliness between the Kauravas and the cowherds when
the cattle are being branded, or the mourning at the funeral of
Pāṇdu.188 The closeness of the clansmen gives way to the dis­
tance between king and subject. The king exercises control over
activities, regulates labour, demands taxes, and can rule through
coercion. These were not the norms of a lineage­based society.
The notion of wages introduced into the contract becomes a
justification for taxes and is a new feature. Taxation necessitates
184 12.283.7–8ff.
185 12.59.13–14.
186 12.15.2–3 and 12.67.3–19.
187 12.67ff., 87.9.
188 3.229.6ff., 1.118.25.
The Mahābhārata 197
officers and ministers who are functionaries rather than kinsmen,
and who are required to keep the more complex system going.
There is an elaborate declaration on the obligations of kingship and
the rights it bestows.189 The rājā, as a functionary,190 introduces the
idea that his rule has to maintain the structures of the state. The
final arbiters are no longer clansmen but ideologues of the state.
Wealth remains a precondition to the sacrificial ritual. But
whereas earlier the ritual was eulogized, now wealth becomes the
source of well­being and only a part is used in ritual. The renounc­
ing of wealth is unacceptable as it negates social obligations.191
Wealth has to be given in dāna, as a gift in charity, but only to
discerning persons. This is not the same as the dāna encouraged
by the Sramanic sects, which is not intended for particular recipi­
ents but for the institution, the Saṅgha. Generating more wealth
requires employing more labour and the supervision of its work.
The ritual status of varṇa has to be extended to redefining the status
of the sūdra, perhaps better viewed as jātis covering a range of
labour­providing occupations.
Mention of gifts of land and digging tanks begin gradually to be
added to earlier gifts of cattle and gold. The capital city, although
still the residence of the ruler, became the hub of the state as well
as a centre for the exchange of goods. Coercive authority need
not refer only to the army but could include all forms of state
coercion, including the enforced observing of laws. Centraliza­
tion of power also involved alliances outside the kingdom with
neighbours. Insisting on a digvijaya would not have been condu­
cive to alliances unless it became symbolic, as it gradually did.
Underlying the discussion on kingship is the right of the king to
rule as a single source of power.
Given the extensive discussion on these matters, its historical
context becomes significant. This was neither the single nor even
the dominant view of kingship. The notion of kingship was also
the subject of discussion in Buddhist circles, as well as among
others whom the brāhmaṇas referred to as nāstikas—essentially
189 12.56.10ff.
190 12.8.8–25.
191 12.9.4-11.1ff.
198 The Past Before Us
those who denied the Vedas, or the role of deities, or opposed brah ­
manical views of caste and its practice.
By the time the epic was put into its present form, there had
been both discussion and experience of various kinds of power in
the half­millennium before. Doubtless some awareness persisted
of the attempts of the Mauryan emperor Aśoka to govern with
a difference. In the Buddhist view the king is appointed by the
people and there is no intervention by either brāhmaṇas or deities.
Dharma, the law of social ethics, gives direction to governance.
The universal observance of an egalitarian social ethic applicable
equally to all, which was the Buddhist dharma, was an implicit
recognition of the priority of this ethic over caste. Where social
ethics were determined by caste, there the controllers of caste had
authority in the state. They probably recognized that the Buddhist
Saṅgha had access to power wherever it received patronage. But
the social ethic of the Sramana sects relied on an ethic of virtue,
with caste not being a determining factor.
There was probably also the realization in the post­Mauryan
period that an ideology of governance focused on a single teaching
was more effective in consolidating power than diffused ideolo­
gies. This might in part explain why the brāhmaṇas referred to
all other belief systems as nāstika, even when the supporters of
other systems, such as Aśoka, called for equal respect towards
brāhmaṇas and śramaṇas. The power of the state was certainly
more dazzling than that of a clan chief.
An obsession with āpad-dharma runs like a thread through the
discourse on the requirements of a good king. To live with societies
that do not abide by the varṇāśrama-dharma, and do not respect
the Vedas, would have been a reason for distress.192 This could be
a reflection of kingdoms ruled by what the brāhmaṇas regarded
as śūdras, vrātya­kṣatriyas, and mlecchas—such as the Nandas,
Mauryas, Indo-Greeks, Śakas, and Kuṣānas. Another aspect of
distress was where, at one place in the text, a Caṇḍāla quotes the
rules from the śāstras to a brāhmaṇa in order to persuade the brāh-
maṇa not to act contrary to his svadharma.193
192 12.110–11.
193 12.139.12ff.
The Mahābhārata 199
Yudhiṣṭhira, filled with remorse at the killing of his kinsmen
in the war, wishes to renounce kingship but is dissuaded and is
consecrated king. As has been pointed out, this echoes the story of
Aśoka and his remorse at the killings in the Kaliṅga war.194 Yudhiṣ-
ṭhira argues that the law of the kṣatra is evil as it endorses the
killing of people—kṣatradharmānna pāpīyāndharmosti bharatar-
ṣabha abhiyāne ca yuddhe ca rājā hanti mahājanam.195 Parallels
to Aśokan thoughts seem not too distant.196 He is told that kings
are cleansed by upholding the righteous and holding back evil, by
conducting yajñas and giving dāna. A Cārvāka curses Yudhiṣṭhira
for causing the killing and is put to death by the brāhmaṇas.197
There must have been some comment on the story of the
Pāṇḍavas killing their kinsmen, as this episode suggests. The his­
torical background would involve not only the policies of Aśoka
but other contradictory political theories; as also the change from
clan to caste, from chiefships to kingships in various places, where
the more localized laws of the former competed with the attempted
uniform regimen of the Dharmaśāstras. The killing of the kṣatriyas
may also have been a metaphor of the success of Vedism over the
nāstikas, given that many kṣatriyas in the gaṇa-saṅghas followed
what the brāhmaṇas regarded as heterodoxies.
The Śānti parvan reflects a debate on what constitutes dharma
with an endorsement of the need to oppose and kill the non­
believers.198 This debate had implications for the legitimacy of
194 If the point of reference was Aśoka’s dhamma, then this would be a refer­
ence back to the past, assuming that the Śānti parvan is post­Mauryan—as is
likely. In this connection mention is made of a svayamvara in Kaliṅga where,
among the kings listed, are Aśoka followed by Śatadhanvan. This hints at some
knowledge of the later Mauryas as given in the Purāṇas, not to mention the link
with Kaliṅga: 12.4.7.
195 12.98.1.
196 J.L. Fitzgerald, The Mahābhārata, Book 12, Śāntiparvan, Part I, 98ff.;
I. Selvanayagam, “Aśoka and Arjuna as Counterfigures Standing on the Field of
Dharma: A Historical-Hermeneutical Perspective”, 59–75; N. Sutton, “Aśoka
and Yudhiṣṭhira. A Historical Setting for the Tensions in the Mahābhārata”,
331–41; A. Hiltebeitel, Rethinking the Mahābhārata, 262–3; idem, “Buddhism
and the Mahābhārata”, 107ff.
197 12.39.22–35.
198 12.34.13–20.
200 The Past Before Us
kingship. The discussion introduces the diverse meanings of
dharma. Violence is evil, but evil is so defined as to apply to
those who do not follow the Dharmaśāstras. The kṣatriya’s duty
is to kill in battle and kill the dasyus—nityodyukto dasyuvadhe
raṇe kuryātparākramam.199 What appears to have been an aud­
ible debate on violence is made inaudible, but nevertheless can be
heard through contradictory statements. War as a form of sacrifice,
where the hero fights and kills for dharma, is often mention­
ed without any questioning, as is the analogy of battle with
yajña.200 The morality of war is a central subject of discussion,
with Arjuna raising it before the war and Yudhiṣṭhira after. The
debate evidently had a history.
Confrontations by subject people were not frequent, although
advice to the ruler against oppressive taxation is frequent. The
barb is sought to be removed by the changed relationship be ­
tween the rājā and the rest, where the latter are referred to as prajā
(children), in this case of the rājā, in the midst of a receding echo
of kinship. Aśoka extends the boundaries of those he includes to
all human beings when he says, save munisse pajā mamā.201
Such changes were neither sudden nor uniform. There were
overlapping situations and some converging functions. But the
general trends were apparent. As the power of the state condensed,
the obvious area of confrontation was from those who opposed
or broke away from the norms and structures introduced by the
coming of the state. This was done in many alternative ways of
thinking and acting in relation to dharma and to rājya. Among
these were renouncers and ascetics who foreswore social obliga­
tions and either went away to live in isolation or else established
alternative societies, as was the case with Buddhist and Jaina
monks. Renouncers claimed a parallel moral authority by moving
out of the system. This was different from the autonomy claimed
by brāhmaṇas as the most superior within the system. Yudhiṣ-
ṭhira posing renunciation as his alternative to kingship was a
crisis for orthodoxy and dangerously close to the teaching of the
heterodox.
199 12.60.14.
200 12.99.12–21.
201 Separate Edict I, in J. Bloch, Les Inscriptions d’Asoka, 137.
The Mahābhārata 201
It would seem, therefore, that somewhere along the line the
Mahābhārata changes course. From legitimizing a lineage­based
society and the clan systems of earlier times, some of which were
still in existence, it turns to endorsing the new rules of the nascent
kingdoms that were superseding the former. The lineage­based
society is part of a presumed history; the kingdom is concerned
with contemporary matters. The change is being legalized in the
new orientations to dharma. The contrast between the two systems
had to be retained in order to demonstrate the change between
what was and what could be with the change to kingship.
If the intention had been only to legitimize the latter, then the
text would have been entirely rewritten to present the Pāṇḍavas
and the Kauravas as full-fledged monarchs. But this would also
have involved changing the entire context of the events, possibly
a degree of reordering which was too extensive, since the oral
tradition had by then already accreted to itself a vast number of
fragments relating to a variety of rājās and janas. And there were
other versions of this tradition familiar to Buddhist and Jaina
sources. Had this been done then the change implicit in the nar­
rative and didactic sections would have been negated. Such a
rewriting was more feasible with a shorter narration of events, as
in the case of the Rāmāyaṇa. If there is a perception of historical
change, and this is sought to be conveyed in the manner in which
the epic is edited, then this also raises related questions of concepts
of time in the redacted Mahābhārata.
9. The Reckoning of Time
The Mahābhārata has a more detailed reckoning of time than the
Vedic corpus. Time now becomes important to narration. This
change would seem to date to around the Christian era, charac­
terized by explorations in Indian astronomy and some fami­
liarity with ideas emanating from the eastern Mediterranean.202
At one level, the reckoning is simple and goes by the seasonal
calendar, as it did earlier, with the movement of the sun and
the moon determining periods of time. The year is divided in­
to the Uttarāyaṇa—the northern or rising cycle—also referred to
as the devayāna (the way of the gods); and the Dakṣināyaṇa—or
202 D. Pingree, “Astronomy and Astrology in India and Iran”, 229–40.
202 The Past Before Us
downward cycle—this being the pitṛyāna (the way of the ancestors).203
Within each year there were three seasons—the rains, winter, and
summer—each of four months (cāturmāsya), which had earlier
marked domestic sacrifices in the Vedas. The agricultural calen ­
dar determined many activities. At another level there was some
attempt to count by generations; occasionally, references are
made to stages in a descent list, although this is not developed
consciously as a form of time reckoning.
Apart from routine calendrical time, the concept of what may
be called cosmological time, perhaps first discussed in the Manu
Dharmaśāstra, also occurs in a late section of the Mahābhārata.204
It envisages time as a mahāyuga (great age), or cycle.205 Each
cycle begins afresh after the destruction of the universe at the
end of the previous great cycle. Each mahāyuga consists of four
lesser yugas of decreasing length which run sequentially and the
figures follow a mathematical pattern. The first is the Kṛta/Satya,
lasting 4800 years, followed by the Tretā of 3600 years, then the
Dvāpara of 2400 years, and ultimately the Kaliyuga, which is the
present cycle or age and will last 1200 years. To the basic figures
of 4000, 3000, 2000, and 1000 were added the two twilight figures
of an equal number of hundreds. The decline is in geometrical
progression. The total of 12,000 years was regarded as an eon. A
thousand eons were equivalent to one day of Brahmā or a kalpa,
a term familiar from Buddhist texts as well. The numbers have to
be multiplied by 360 to convert them into human years. In human
years this would work out to:
Kṛta 4800 = 1,728,000
Tretā 3600 = 1,296,000
Dvāpara 2400 = 864,000
Kali 1200 = 432,000
The four constituting the
mahāyuga 12,000 = 4,320,000
203 G. Held, The Mahābhārata: An Ethnological Study, 189ff.
204 L. Gonzales-Reiman, The Mahābhārata and the Yugas; Mahābhārata,
12.216–20. It is also added to the narrative when the Bhārgava ṛṣi Mārkaṇḍeya
recites it to Yudhiṣṭhira: 3.188.10–189.1ff.
205 3.148.10ff., 186.16ff., 187.31, 188.10,64, 188.89ff., 189.1–15.
The Mahābhārata 203
The numbers are drawn from various sources. Sometimes they
are the same as those quoted for the number of bricks to build
a fire-altar or the number of syllables used in a Vedic text, but
they also coincide with Mesopotamian figures used in cosmo -
logy. There seems to have been a dialogue between cosmographers
and astronomers of the time in discussing these numbers.
Characteristic of the four yugas was also an increasing moral
decline and a falling off of the rules of social behaviour from the
first to the fourth. Towards the end of the Kaliyuga, the world
of dharma is turned upside down. The notion of the decline of
dharma was central and causally connected to the coming of Kalki,
ushering in a return of dharma at the end of the Kaliyuga which
leads eventually to the return of the Kṛta of the next mahāyuga.
Time is therefore linked to the utopia of the past, from which
there is a downward slide to the present and an eventual return
of utopian conditions at the start of the next great cycle. The end
of the eon is heralded by unseasonal climate and cataclysms.
The decrease in the length of the yuga and of dharma is partly
inherent and partly attributed to the infiltration of mlecchas into
society. Kalki, the tenth and final reincarnation of Viṣṇu, brings
about the end of lawlessness and the usurpation of power by the
low castes. There is an implicit eschatology in the scheme of the
mahāyuga, moving from utopian beginnings to an ultimate end.
Just prior to the termination of the great cycle comes the saviour
figure of Kalki, who makes possible the return of utopia and a
new great cycle. Orientalist scholarship denied this as eschato ­
logy since there is a return to a mahāyuga and not the termination
of time. However, the length of each great cycle is so enormous
that it annuls the measurement of time. It is a fantasy that remains
symbolic, as indeed does that of the Judaeo­Christian tradition,
invoking the teleology of the Garden of Eden ending with Judge­
ment Day. Nevertheless it has to be seen as eschatology, even if
dissimilar from the Judaeo­Christian. There is a distinct relation
to the past and present.
The significance of this concept also lies in areas other than
the measurement of time. The names of the yugas—Kṛta, Tretā,
Dvāpara, and Kali—are the same as those used for successive
204 The Past Before Us
numbers in the throw of dice.206 They indicate descending num­
bers that suit the declining length of each cycle. Implicit in this
scheme is the suggestion of fate unfolding in time. The word for
time—kāla—although etymologically linked to the root *kal (to
calculate), is also used in the sense of destiny. Thus, references to
the yugas and to time are frequent in the text.
Even more important is the description of the yugas. The Kṛta,
which is the winning throw in dice, is an age when law reigns
supreme, there are no gods and anti­gods, no Vedas, no transac­
tions, no need for labour, an absence of disease and conflict, and
the four varṇas are respected. The Tretā registers a small decline
in moral values with a reduced observance of laws and sacred
duty by a quarter, and with motivation becoming the purpose of
action. In the Dvāpara the law is further reduced, and lust, disease,
and untruth are observed. In the Kali age only a quarter of the
law survives and there is a moral degeneration among people.
Detailed descriptions of the problems of this age emphasize an
overturning of the rules of sacred duty, with lower castes taking
on the function of the higher. Misbehaviour is attributed to this
time­cycle. Whereas dharma declines in each age, the need for
labour increases. It is a world turned upside down. Even the com­
plexion of the gods changes colour in each yuga! This construction
of time cycles is of the later period, when kingship and caste had
become characteristic features of society, and this description was
probably added to the epic.
The use of time concepts as a key to viewing social change is
common to many cultures, where there is an image of the remote
past as utopian, and utopia can take the form of negating present
conditions. Hesiod, for example, uses the myth of the metallic
ages: gold, silver, bronze, and iron, to reflect on Greek society. The
golden age was when men lived like gods, with land provid­
ing grain without labour, with an absence of sickness and old
age, and with a gentle death. The age of silver brought a reduction
in longevity, and a turning away from the gods and from offering
sacrifices. The age of bronze was violent and fierce. The pre-
sent age, of iron, is depicted in negative terms and it is said that
206 Aitareya Brāhmaṇa, 7.15.
The Mahābhārata 205
nothing will be as it was in the past, customary social behaviour
having been overthrown. The contrast is between the gold and the
iron, with the silver and the bronze providing a passage between
them.207
Some scholars maintain that cyclic notions of time are charac­
teristic of India and the recurring cycle is a refusal of history. All
events are liable to be repeated in the next cycle, so no event can
be particular or unique.208 But a different reading can be given of
cyclic time. Cyclic or cosmological time becomes the circumfer­
ence of social activity, seen sequentially as units within which a
society is created, lives out its history, and is extinguished. Change
therefore is evident. It also necessitates an increase in the span of
time from a five-year yuga as it was in the Ṛgveda to one of 12,000
divine years. This reflects a constant expansion in the scope of
the past, where the past can then be variously compared with the
shorter and more limited present.
Cyclic cosmology therefore marks a growing concern with the
relationship between past and present. It fits with the narrative of
the Bharatas since the story deals with the passing of an earlier
age, the annihilation of many clans, and the preservation of the few
who are responsible for creating the present Kali age. Because the
events narrated took place in the earlier Dvāpara age, the narra­
tive is firmly a narrative of the past. Placing the epics in the Tretā
and Dvāpara is also meant to evoke a distant past for the events.
The timespan of the mahāyuga is so immense that the repetition
of events becomes irrelevant. The notion of these yugas allows
the projection of a cosmic struggle where the intervention of the
deity, Viṣṇu, becomes imperative.
There is also in the epic the initial notion of linear time. This
is evident in the recording of descent through genealogies. These
are not elaborate, but they record a sense of the chronology of per­
son and event. The word for lineage is vaṃśa, a bamboo or cane,
capturing the idea of a linear form with nodes, each node giving
207 Hesiod’s Theogony: Works and Days, 106–201.
208 M. Eliade, “Time and Eternity in Indian Thought”; M. Eliade, Cosmos and
History: The Myth of the Eternal Return. For an alternative view, see R. Thapar,
Time as a Metaphor of History.
206 The Past Before Us
rise to a stem: a precise parallel to a generation and its descent to
the next generation. It is also possible to argue that linear time is
a segment of the cyclic arc but has a different trajectory.
Seen differently, three elements of time have been suggested
for the epic genre: heroic time, which is the background to heroic
society; narrative time, which is when the epic is believed to have
been first composed and is therefore a witness to the events des-
cribed; and documentary time, which relates to the various recen­
sions of the epic.209 There is therefore a continuum between the
three elements. This questions the notion of there being only two
points of time in a text, that of the events and that of the composi­
tion describing them. These three events seem more logical in that
they refer to the time of the events, that of the composition, and
that of the reformulations of the composition. Seeing the past in
this way evokes perspectives which, subsequent to the first, hint
at history.
The movement back and forth in time is evident in the epics.
Events and social patterns sometimes have to be explained with
reference to a previous cycle of time. In this there is, at one level,
a continuum of time in that events move back and forth; but at
another level there is a disjuncture in time in that events belong
to different time cycles. More manageable is the continuum within
the single yuga, with the same characters moving from one birth
to another, a device used on occasion to explain an otherwise
inexplicable situation.
That the period towards the end of the Kurukṣetra war ushered
in the fourth and last time cycle is yet another way of separating
the time of the heroes from the aftermath of the war, of distancing
the past from the present. The passing away of the elders of the
family of the heroes is held in transit, as it were, whilst the Śānti
and Anuśāsana parvans are recited. Bhīṣma lying on a bed of ar­
rows, wounded and about to die, holds forth for days on various
dharmas. This can only be a disjuncture in the narrative, of both
intention and authorship. Was this the major brahmanical inter­
vention, which is also reflected in lesser forms elsewhere? The
209 Victor Turner, “Comparative Epic and Saga”, quoted in A. Hiltebeitel,
The Ritual of Battle, 50.
The Mahābhārata 207
dominance of the notion of time beyond the cyclic and the linear
lies in statements such as that the death of a person who is killed is
determined by Time; or that Time itself is the great killer.210 The
authorship of the Mahābhārata suggests that later redactors as
authors were looking back at the earlier composition, and were
adding to it in accordance with their intention of changing its func ­
tion, but not so as to obliterate the purpose of the original composi­
tion. The attempt was to use the earlier composition as history in
order to legitimize its later purpose. Cosmological time cycles are
so deployed as to introduce the notion of time as a feature of social
change through the various ages—a process that is characteristic
of historical writing today. But the intention is also to accom­
modate the linear time of genealogies in the age that precedes
the emergence of dynasties—the Dvāpara prior to the Kali. As
reviewed by the redactors, the termination of the kṣatriyas is a time
marker separating these two ages. The battle at Kurukṣetra marks
the end of clan societies just prior to the coming of dynasties.
There is, at many levels, an interplay of what came before and
what came later. The narrative section is in any case subsequent
to the events described and is looking back at what was believed
to have happened earlier. The didactic sections incorporate a more
recent perspective of the narrative. The two changing perspectives
are not merely those of a change in time but also project two views
of society, one subsequent to the other; and in highlighting the dif­
ference they incorporate a consciousness of historical change.
210 Mahābhārata, 12.34.4ff.
5
The Rāmāyaṇa
1. Epic
The epic form, as I have suggested, can be viewed as the
articulation of a consciousness relating to the historical
past, even if the events which it narrates may not all be
historically authenticated. As part of an oral tradition, its form is
relatively freer than written forms. Variants in narrative or char-
acterization—which can become apparent through a comparison
of the epic’s recensions—suggest changes in historical context.
The new looks back on the old, and often does so nostalgically.
The epic has a potential role in the making of a historical tradition
since there is, as we have seen, a relation between history and the
epic, however ambiguous. Is the epic meant to narrate what hap-
pened, or is the mythical and heroic gloss on the narrative so
extensive that what may have been historical becomes opaque?
Does the epic represent actual events—the “hard facts” as some
historians would call them—which permit of the historicity of an
epic age? Or are the epics essentially born of imagination and so
heavily interpolated in later periods that even the episodes can
hardly be dated or set in a historical context?
Whereas in the previous chapter my attempt was to show how
the text depicts two different kinds of polities—the clan system
and the kingdom—the first earlier than the second and the two as
ideologically opposed, my intention in this chapter is to show the
two in actual confrontation, encouraged by their ideological op-
position. I shall also argue that where a variant version questions
The Rāmāyaṇa 209
the authenticity of the hegemonic, the explanation it provides to
support its views may shed light on the historical purpose of the
hegemonic version and the contradiction thereof.
The narrative of the rāma-kathā—what might have been the
original story of Rāma—has many more variants than the Mahā­-
bhārata. Although the Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa has become the hege-
monic text, the variants point to a choice of narratives that existed
at various times. The chronology of the variants suggests some
consciousness of a historical process. I have selected three vari-
ants, all important in their own traditions and closer in time to
each other. I shall examine the degree to which they can be seen
as charters of validation referring to discrete moments of time and
reflecting the perspectives of alternative historical traditions.
The three are the Buddhist Dasaratha­Jātaka,1 contemporary
with and perhaps even prior to the second version to be discussed
here—namely the Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa—and which may have been
one among the many tellings known to Vālmīki;2 and the third is
the Jaina version of the story, the Paumacariyam of Vimalasūri.3
This last contests the Vālmīki version and is the only one of the
three that claims to be historically authentic. Irrespective of when
the earliest oral tradition was current, these three versions were
established by the early Christian era.
The variants do not build on a single uniform story. In the
Dasaratha­Jātaka, one part of the Rāmāyaṇa story is narrated. The
Jaina version questions the veracity of the existing versions. The
Jātakas, composed in Pāli, date to about the second century bc;
the different phases of the Rāmāyaṇa, composed in Sanskrit, are
dated to c. 400 bc to ad 400; and the Paumacariyam, in Prākrit,
dates to the early centuries ad. The authorship differs too—as
will be discussed for each version. And then there are differ-
ences of context. Apart from all else, the first of these reflects a
clan-based society; the second is essentially the conflict between
1 Dasaratha­Jātaka, no. 461, The Jātaka, IV.78.
2 The­Vālmīki­Rāmāyaṇa, General Editors G.H. Bhatt and U.P. Shah, 7 vols;
The­Ramāyaṇa­of­Vālmīki, Critical Edition, trans. R.P. Goldman, et­al., vols I–VI
and VII forthcoming. All future citations of the Rāmāyaṇa, unless otherwise
specified, are to the G.H. Bhatt and U.P. Shah version.
3 Paumacariyam, ed. H. Jacobi.
210 The­Past­Before­Us­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­
a kingdom and a chiefship; and the third assumes a universality
of kingdoms.
Both in terms of chronology and content, there is a perception
of historical change and the later text becomes a commentary on
what has preceded it. This perception is not sufficient in itself to
demonstrate a sense of history. Each represents a different pers-
pective on historical change. The Jaina text specifically denies his-
toricity to the other two but claims it for itself. Whereas historical
consciousness has to be extracted when it is embedded in a text,
a statement such as this suggests more clearly the recognition of
a historical tradition.
What seems significant therefore is to ask why there was a
need for diverse versions. What were the reasons for the dissimi-
larities? And what was the nature of the historical statements (if
they can be called that) which each version was making? Variant
versions of the rāma-kathā are prolific through the centuries. The
three selected are expressions of a consciousness of the historical
moment rather than historicity: by this I mean that they show an
awareness of the time during which they were composed, not that
they contain facts which can be verified. Since the Rāmāyaṇa was
of a more manageable size than the Mahābhārata, it was possible
to maintain parallel versions of the story, or parts of it.
Nineteenth-century interpretations of the Rāmāyaṇa saw it as
the narrative of a confrontation between Aryans and Dravidians,
of North Indian Aryan invaders pushing aside the Dravidians and
forcing their way into South India and Sri Lanka.4 The Aryan, it
was maintained, is represented as the orderly and advanced so-
ciety of Ayodhyā and the Dravidian by the uncouth wildness of
the rākṣasas. This dichotomy was influenced by that of the civil-
ized and the primitive, central to the nineteenth-century concept
of civilization, and was a transplant from European ideological
obsessions with “the Aryan”. Since “Aryan” and “Dravidian” do
not refer to a race or ethnic group but to a language identity, the
historical process of establishing a language becomes a far more
complicated matter of why languages are spoken and by whom.
4 C. Lassen, Indisches­Alterthumskunde, vol. I, 596ff.; M. Monier Williams,
Indian­Epic­Poetry, 9–10.
The Rāmāyaṇa 211
The perspective from the epic itself poses the distinction as be-
ing between two political forms, social codes, belief systems, and
ecologies.
Some modern ideologies of nationalism in their more extreme
forms insist on the historicity of epic events and persons and seek
to construct history from these. The epic can be treated as among
the genres reflecting a past, but this does not permit it being read
literally as history. The debate on the historical versus the legend-
ary can become a central concern of politics in a nation-state.5
Associated with this is the attempt to authenticate the contents of
the epic by searching for archaeological counterparts. This has
yielded no viable results—as was to be expected, since fantasy
plays an immense role in epic compositions and is not reflected in
excavated artefacts, although it may influence their interpretation.
The sites excavated yield too many discrepancies and the inter-
pretations of such excavations remain controversial.6 A further
problem is that the present-day place names need not be those of
earlier locations.7
The Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmīki was converted from a narrative epic
to the sacred literature of the Vaiṣṇavas when Rāma was trans-
formed into an incarnation of Viṣṇu, which in turn distanced it
from the variants.
5 Witness the controversy over the birthplace of Rāma in the conflict at
Ayodhyā: Sarvepalli Gopal (ed.), Anatomy­of­a­Confrontation.
6 Indian­Archaeology—A­Review, 1976–7, 1979–80; B.B. Lal, “Historicity
of the Mahabharata and the Ramayana: What has Archaeology to Say in the
Matter”; idem, “The Two Indian Epics vis-à-vis Archaeology”, 27–34. Recent
excavations at Ayodhyā (2002–3) to determine whether there was a temple
beneath the Babri Masjid have not revealed the remnants of such a temple—
judging by what has been reported. Excavations at Ayodhyā date the earliest
levels to c. the seventh century bc, with an early form of the Northern Black
Polished Ware at the lowest levels. The material culture of this level does not
conform to the descriptions in the text of Ayodhyā as an urban centre, and such
centres date to c. the fifth century bc from excavations. This would of course
be in conflict with the later tradition, which takes the events of the Rāmāyaṇa
back to an impossibly distanced past located in cosmology, the Tretā yuga, the
second of the four time-cycles of many millennia ago.
7 B.B. Lal, “Was Ayodhya a Mythical City?”, 45–9; M.C. Joshi, “Ayodhya:
Mythical and Real”, 107–9; G. Roth, “Ayodhyā and Ganga”, 121–34.
212 The­Past­Before­Us­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­
The theme of the rāma-kathā was treated in a variety of ways.8
The changes introduced in the retelling are of other times and
draw on other ideologies. These versions incorporate a change of
perception, both of personalities and the events known to the early
epic. Each variant version is making a statement; often, these are
implicitly historical statements since they reflect the social as-
sumptions of a particular segment of society at a point in time. It
becomes difficult to argue that there is a single authentic version,
for every version claims authenticity. Comparing versions also
makes it possible to see the raw material of epic episodes and the
way in which these episodes or incidents are introduced into what
becomes the hegemonic text in a given tradition.
The composition of an epic changes with repeated recitation,
the changes being either innocuous or substantial depending upon
the person reciting it, the audience, and the occasion. When frag-
ments are collated into an epic, which then takes a written form,
the recording is relatively uniform. There were therefore changes
in the oral composition. What we have now in manuscript versions
of the Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa are the outcome of reformulations from
the oral, together with interpolations into the written.
The intensity with which the many variant versions were propa-
gated through the centuries makes it apparent that the rāma-kathā,
though not necessarily the Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa, was one of the
thematic dialogues of Indian civilization. It occurs wherever the
more elite Indian culture touched local cultures, resulting in narra-
tive variations that reflect the vast span of cultural intersections.9
The dialogue registers historical change both in terms of space and
time, the location and date of the variants being significant. Differ-
ences in narrative are not accidental, for they are either affirming
or contesting each variation, whether marginally or centrally.
The literary currency of the poem is evident from allusions in
other literature and epigraphs. Comparisons have also been made
between the conflict of Rāma and Rāvaṇa with that between Indra
and Vṛtra in the Ṛgveda. Aśvaghoṣa’s Buddhacarita, a biography
8 R. Thapar, “A Historical Perspective on the Story of Rama”, 141–63; J.L.
Brockington, Righteous Rāma.
9 Its continuing centrality to South East Asian societies, and the Indonesian
in particular, is a case in point.
The Rāmāyaṇa 213
of the Buddha, seems in a few instances to have borrowed from
the Vālmīki version. These link the past with the present.
With the geographical spread of the epics, local landmarks were
associated with the story. Episodes familiar to a local audience
could find their way into the main narrative, so that the events
of the epics are in a sense localized. The nuances and emphases
change in accordance with the requirements of the local culture,
and sometimes even the narrative is altered. The story could be
appropriated by a different authorship and be given a different
rendering. By including the genealogical portions and maintain-
ing that the epics recorded a slice of the itihāsa-purāṇa tradition,
an element of believed history was introduced. However, there
could at most be a sliver of historicity, enveloped to the point of
near invisibility in the many embellishments within the narrative.
Nevertheless, the embellishments provide the narrative with a
different historical perspective.
2. The Jātaka Variants
In the Buddhist commentaries and texts of the early centuries ad,
references to the epic stories—the bharata­yuddha, sītāharana,
and other such stories—are uncomplimentary and described as
“purposeless talk”.10 But the stories which make up the Jātaka
anthology include scattered fragments which either echo episodes
from a rāma-kathā or are narratives of clans that were eventually
coalesced into an epic story. If these fragments, or ākhyānas, were
put together in the larger epic, the implication would be that both
categories of texts derive from a common oral tradition.
The Jātaka stories were, with a few exceptions, brief narratives
looking back at the past and relating incidents of a past life of the
Buddha. Some are fantasy, some mention clans and persons. The
dialogue of the protagonist, generally the Buddha in a previous
birth, approximates some aspect of his teaching: hence their inclu-
sion even as folk literature in the Buddhist Pāli Canon. Composed
in Pāli prose, some include verses from earlier times. Their loca-
tions are largely the initial area of the spread of Buddhism—the
10 Buddhaghosācārya­Papañcasudāni­(Majjhimanikāya-aṭṭakathā), 1.163;
Culavaṃsa, 75.59, 83.46.
214 The­Past­Before­Us­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­
Ganges plain and Central India. As recast in their present form,
their authors were monks. The audience was the lay community
of Buddhists and others who heard the teachings in an accessible
form. The Jātakas were familiar stories recited in the context of
Buddhist ethics, and the claim that they pertain to previous lives
of the Buddha provided an opportunity to proselytize. This is
also evident from their visual depiction at stūpa sites during the
same period.11
That the Jātaka versions were not an attempt at an alternative
version of the Rāmāyaṇa is evident from the absence of narrat-
ing the same events from a Buddhist perspective. The historical
contexts of the Buddhist compositions were often the gaṇa-
saṅghas (chiefdoms) and incipient kingdoms, and urbanism of
the mid-first millennium bc, the written forms being subsequent.
Heroic societies were part of an ancient past for Buddhist authors.
Whether some of the Jātaka stories were based on a currency of
the Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa, or drew from an earlier oral tradition of
episodic tales that went into the making of the latter, has been
debated. The details of the stories, where they differ, become
significant statements.
Mention of persons associated with the rāma-kathā in these
stories often come from the earlier verse sections. There are, for
example, verses describing the sorrow of Rāma’s mother when he
is exiled;12 Sītā’s devotion to Rāma when accompanying him into
exile;13 and the description of Rāma as Daśaratha’s royal son.14
There are also episodes similar to those in the Rāmāyaṇa, such as
Daśaratha accidentally killing the young ascetic whilst on a hunt,15
has its parallel in the Sāma­Jātaka.16 It has been viewed as the
hidden power of fate in the epic narrative,17 but in the Jātaka the
11 V. Dehejia, Discourse­in­Early­Buddhist­Art.
12 Jayaddisa­Jātaka, no. 513, in The­Jātaka.
13 Vessantara­Jātaka, no. 547, in ibid.
14 Dasaratha-rājaputta, in V. Fausboll, The­Jātaka, vol. VI, 558.
15 Rāmāyaṇa, 2.57.8ff.
16 Sāma­Jātaka, no. 540, in The Jātaka.
17 The­Rāmāyaṇa­of­Vālmīki, Vol.­II:­Ayodhyākāṇḍa, ed. and trans. S. Pollock,
gen. ed. R.P. Goldman. It could also be viewed as the unexpected in the adven-
ture narrative as analysed by M.M. Bakhtin, “Epic and Novel”, in idem, The
Dialogic­Imagination.
The Rāmāyaṇa 215
Buddhist ethical perspective is underlined through the remorse of
the king at his action, his decision to look after the blind parents,
and the eventual return to life of the dead son.
An important episode concerns Ayodhyā which in the Buddhist
texts is located on the Ganges and is distinct from Sāketa. On one
occasion it is said to have been attacked by the Andhavenhuputta,
who besieged and subjugated the city, after which they returned
to Dvāravatī in western India.18 The Andhavenhu/Andhakavṛṣṇi
are said to be dāsaputtas, therefore of low birth or alien culture,19
and are also mentioned in some Purāṇas as kṣatriyas, but of a
lesser status. The Haihayas, another segment of this lineage, also
attacked Ayodhyā.20
Videha and its capital, Mithilā, are mentioned,21 Mithilā as
a prosperous city reminiscent of Ayodhyā in the Rāmāyaṇa.22
Videha is a rich land of 16,000 villages with full granaries and
16,000 dancing girls. Names such as Nimi and Janaka occur in the
later Puranic genealogies of the Videha branch of the Ikṣvāku or
Sūryavaṃśa/Solar line.23
The Jātaka story which comes closest to the main frame of
the Rāmāyaṇa, but nevertheless differs in significant ways, is the
Dasaratha­Jātaka, and this has been commented upon at length.24
Dasaratha rules from Varanasi and not from Ayodhyā. He has two
sons, Rāma-paṇḍita and Lakkhana, and a daughter, Sītā-devī, from
his eldest queen. After her death he raises another wife to the status
of queen consort, and she demands that her son Bharata be made
the heir-apparent. The king, frightened that the new consort will
harm the older sons, suggests to them that they flee to the neigh-
bouring kingdom and claim their rights after Dasaratha has died,
18 G. Malalasekera, Dictionary­of­Pali­Proper­Names, vol. I, 165.
19 Ghaṭa Jātaka, no. 454, in The Jātaka.
20 F.E. Pargiter, Ancient­Indian­Historical­Tradition, 153.
21 Sādhīna­Jātaka, no. 494; Suruci­Jātaka, no. 489; Mahā-ummagga­Jātaka,
no. 546; Vinīlaka­Jātaka, no. 160; Mahāpanāda­Jātaka, no. 264; Makhādeva­
Jātaka, no. 9; Nimi­Jātaka, no. 541; Kumbhakāra­Jātaka, no. 408: all in The
Jātaka.
22 Rāmāyaṇa, 1.5.6ff., 1.6; Mahājanaka Jātaka, no. 539, in The Jātaka.
23 F.E. Pargiter, Ancient­Indian­Historical­Tradition, 145ff.
24 Dasaratha­Jātaka, no. 461, in The Jātaka; V. Fausboll, The­Dasaratha-
Jātaka,­being­the­Buddhist­Story­of­King­Rāma.
216 The­Past­Before­Us­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­
it having been prophesied that he would die after twelve years.
Sītā accompanies her brothers and the three go to the Himalaya.
Dasaratha dies after nine years. Bharata, refusing to become
king, goes in search of Rāma and tries to persuade him to return.
Lakkhana and Sītā, on hearing of their father’s death, faint, but
Rāma preaches to them on the impermanence of life. This is the
core teaching of this Jātaka, where Rāma-paṇḍita was the Buddha
in a previous incarnation. Rāma insists that he will return only
after twelve years have been completed and therefore gives his
sandals to Bharata, to symbolically guide him in taking decisions.
Finally, they all return to the kingdom. Rāma makes Sītā his queen
consort and they rule righteously for 16,000 years. The kidnapping
of Sītā is not part of this narrative.
This Jātaka is in part a parallel to the second book of the Rāmā-
yaṇa, the Ayodhyākāṇḍa. Superimposed on the story are themes
from the origin myths of the kṣatriya clans, particularly those of the
Śākyas and the Koliyas from Buddhist sources.25 These constitute
the charter of validation from the Buddhist perspective. Some of
their features are anathema to brahmanical views—as for example
that Rāma and Sītā are siblings, yet rule as consorts.
An ancestral figure in some stories is king Okkāka, who is said
to have sent for the daughter of the rājā of the Madras for his son
Kuśa. She arrives together with a hunchback nurse, reminiscent
of the story in the Rāmāyaṇa.26 The Madras were neighbours of
the Kekeyas in northern India. The name Okkāka is said to de-
rive from okkamukha, light seemed to come from his mouth.27
In one Buddhist tradition Okkāka is equated with Ikṣvāku and
the etymology of this name is derived from ikṣu (sugarcane), the
usual etymology as given in Puranic sources.28 The association
with the Ikṣvākus may have been a later attempt to link kṣatriya
25 See Chapter Nine.
26 Kusa Jātaka, no. 531, in The Jātaka.
27 Sumaṅgalavilāsinī, 1.R258; “. . . kathanakāle­ukkā­viya­mukhato­pabhā­nic-
charati­tasmātam­okākkoti­sanjanisu­ti . . .” The Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 1.4.1.14–17,
describing Videgha Māthava travelling east to the middle Ganges region, states
that he carried Agni in his mouth. This could be a reference to bringing the fire
sacrifice to the region or it could be, as I have suggested elsewhere, a reference
to bringing Aryan speech to the region.
28 S. Beal, Romantic­History­of­Buddha, 18ff.
The Rāmāyaṇa 217
clans which supported Buddhism with one of the two major royal
lineages of the Puranic kṣatriya tradition.
The theme of exile and kidnapping occurs more than once in
the Jātakas, with the Sambula Jātaka being close to the Rāmāyaṇa
story.29 It focuses on the hesitant reconciliation of a husband to his
wife who had been kidnapped by a rākṣasa and eventually rescued
by Sakra/Indra. The Vessantara­Jātaka is most frequently quoted
in connection with the theme of exile.30 Vessantara is the epitome
of the gift-giving rājā since he bestows his wealth on all who ask
for it. Finally, he even gifts his famous rain-inducing elephant to
the rājā of Kaliṅga, who is in need of it to terminate a prolonged
drought in his kingdom. The subjects of Vessantara, incensed by
this act—which symbolizes the loss of prosperity—banish him.
His wife, in emulation of Sītā, accompanies him into exile. They
travel to the distant territory of the Cedis and live in the forest.
But even here he is beset by greedy brāhmaṇas. They take away
his children and his wife to work for them. A passing comparison
is made to Sītā. Eventually Sakra appears, and it turns out that
the tribulations of Vessantara were to test his ability to gift even
those whom he loved. The emphasis in this story is on dāna, the
gift-giving much propagated in Buddhist ethics. The ethical un-
derlining is different from that of the Rāmāyaṇa, which is more
focussed on familiar heroic values encapsulated in the destruction
of the evil rākṣasas.
Underlying the many stories, some themes seem parallel to
ideas that shaped the Rāmāyaṇa. Events take place in a known
geographical area. The geographical dimension is emphasized in
the theme of exile where the banished rājās either go north to the
Himalaya or south towards the Vindhyan region. The Cedi jana-
pada was clearly important and the Cetīya­Jātaka gives the lineage
of the Cedi rājās.31 They were descended from the primeval ruler
in Buddhist origin myths, the Mahāsammata, and one of their more
famous ancestors had been gifted an aerial chariot. After him the
lineage was segmented, and his five sons are said to have ruled in
29 Sambula­Jātaka, no. 519, in The­Jātaka.
30 No. 547, in The­Jātaka; R. Gombrich, “The Vessantara­Jātaka, the Rāmā-
yaṇa and the Dasaratha­Jātaka”, 427–37.
31 Cetīya­Jātaka, no. 422, in The­Jātaka.
218 The­Past­Before­Us­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­
five different regions of Central India, a statement also made in the
Purāṇas,32 and in the Mahābhārata in connection with the ancestry
of Jarāsandha. The Vessantara­Jātaka mentions that the land of
the Cedis was replete with meat, wine, and rice, and inhabited by
60,000 khattiyas/kṣatriyas who lived there as rājās, suggesting that
it was a chiefship.33 The Jātaka stories reflect transitional stages
between the polities of chiefships and kingdoms.
Exile in these stories could symbolize migration and settlement
in new areas. Even if the exiles return to their original home, there
continue to be connections with the area of exile. Colonization
was probably expressed in the form of exile, perhaps to dramatize
the explanation for migration. The actual process of coloniza-
tion would be similar in each case, irrespective of the narrative
which provided the justification. The process is described in the
Jayaddisa­Jātaka, where land is settled by the king through clear-
ing, digging a lake, preparing the fields, bringing in a thousand
families, and founding a village such that it could support ascetics
through alms.34 New settlements also led gradually to the growth
of new cities, and this introduced a different culture.
The etymology of khattiya/kṣatriya in the Buddhist texts derives
not from being a warrior but from being the lord of fields. Thus,
those who go into exile are described as belonging to the rājakula
(ruling clans). In some cases, as in that of the Cetīya­Jātaka, frag-
ments of their genealogy are given to indicate their status; in other
cases it is enough to say that they belong to the Ikṣvāku lineage.
The occurrence of sibling incest in origin myths may symbol-
ize many things: marriage between two exogamous phratries or
tribal subdivisions from the period of the original settlement; a
hint of cross-cousin marriage; or a method of stressing purity of
descent where ancestry is traced back to a single set of parents
32 F.E. Pargiter, Ancient­Indian­Historical­Tradition, 118ff.
33 The link between the Cedis and Kaliṅga is interestingly attested to in the
Hathigumpha inscription: see D.C. Sircar, Select Inscriptions, 214ff. Khāravela,
the king of Kaliṅga, describes himself as a descendant of the Cedi king and takes
the title of Mahāmeghavāhana, as did other kings of Kaliṅga.
34 Jayaddisa Jātaka, no. 513, in The­Jātaka. This is similar to the statement in
the Arthaśāstra, 2.1, referring to the settling of land by śūdra cultivators under
the control of the state in order to start cultivation and collect revenue.
The Rāmāyaṇa 219
and is therefore a symbolic demarcation of distinctive status. The
theme of sibling marriage may also suggest some traces of a sys-
tem of succession where a brother and sister merely rule jointly.
Sibling marriage was not intended to be taken literally but was a
way of underlining high status, as in the Dasaratha­Jātaka. That
the theme is common to many Buddhist origin myths places the
story in a recognizably Buddhist context.
In terms of political sanction, these stories reflect a mixture of
the gaṇa-saṅgha chiefships or oligarchies and incipient kingship.
Members of the ruling clan can be removed by angry subjects, as
was Vessantara. Other Jātakas refer to rājās being either banished,
or to situations of crisis where they are called upon to abdicate.
Some were elected by popular opinion. The Cedis boast of many
thousand rājās, suggesting a large gaṇa-saṅgha. Where individual
rājās are mentioned, kingship is still not so familiar.
The social ethic in the Buddhist ethos is implicitly emphasized
in the qualities that make the ideal hero. Dāna becomes a major
criterion of morality, often associated with­karuṇā (compassion).
Central to this ethos is the ideal of the bodhisattva who postpones
his nirvāṇa in order to help others attain theirs. Any identification
of Rāma with a deity is noticeably absent. The link between the
past and the present is maintained in the Jātaka stories through
the belief that these referred to the Buddha’s previous births. This
eliminated a sudden disjuncture or abrupt termination of the past
and allowed for a sense in which the past seemed to glide into
the present.
Many Jātakas narrate stories of the kings of Kosala: Pasenadi
and Viḍūḍbha; and the kings of the powerful state of Magadha:
Bimbisāra and Ajātasattu.35 These kings ruled prior to the
Nandas of the fourth century bc. But there is no association of
Rāma with the kingdom of Kosala as an earlier ruler. He is merely
one of many in the Jātakas, and of no particular significance. This
would suggest that the epic names, if not fictional, claim to be
earlier than the chronology assigned to the Buddhist oral tradition.
Alternatively, if the rāma-kathā was “purposeless talk”, it would
not have been given prominence.
35 G.P. Malalasekera, Dictionary­of­Pali­Proper­Names, vol. II, 285ff.
220 The­Past­Before­Us­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­
3. The Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa
The­Text
The story of Rāma is narrated by Nārada to Vālmīki in the opening
sarga of the Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa. It would seem to have had links
with the earlier rāma-kathā,36 perhaps a floating bardic tradition of
fragmentary stories from which Vālmīki composed a single text.
This is infrequently referred to as itihāsa in the earlier section of
the text, but much more frequently as kāvya (poetry) in the later
sections and sometimes as the ādi-kāvya (the first poem), where it
is also on occasion referred to as­ākhyāna­or even purāṇa.37 This
might suggest a change from a past that was thought of as having
actually happened, to recognizing the layers of creative imagina-
tion that went into the making of an early literary masterpiece—
prior to its being converted into a sacred text. It was initially part
of an open oral tradition, as were most ākhyānas, until they were
recorded later in a written form.38 Since the text has been interpo-
lated at various times it cannot be dated to a particular period and
only the occasional episode can find a possibly verifiable historical
counterpart. This again has led historians to discard the notion of
an “epic age” firmly rooted in chronology.
It may be suggested that the Rāmāyaṇa, as we have it today,
went through various forms, as did the Mahābhārata. Fragmen-
tary narratives from the oral tradition were probably selected
and recomposed and compiled as an epic poem by Vālmīki; this
poem then absorbed interpolations defining the accoutrements of
kingship and introducing the worship of Viṣṇu—here presented
as the Rāma-avatāra as part of the newly emerging Bhāgavata
religion. Both were developments of the late first millennium bc
36 The­Rāmāyaṇa­of­Vālmīki,­Vol.­I:­Bālakāṇḍa, ed. and trans. R.P. Gold-
man, 31ff.
37 1.4.6–7, 1.4.21–6.
38 C. Bulcke, Rāmakathā; H.D. Sankalia, Ramayana:­Myth­or­Reality;
G. Bailey and M. Brockington, Epic­Threads; J. Brockington, The­Sanskrit­
Epics; J. Brockington, Righteous­Rāma, examines carefully the many layers in
the text and suggests five stages which went into the making of the present text.
N. Sen, “Comparative Studies in Oral Epic Poetry and the Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa:
A Report on the Bālakāṇḍa”, 397–409.
The Rāmāyaṇa 221
and the early centuries ad. The attempt therefore was to condense
the fragments into one text.
The two foci of the Rāmāyaṇa are the events which centre on
the kingdom of Ayodhyā, and those which narrate the period of
exile culminating in the battle at Laṅkā.39 Within each a number
of sub-fragments can be detected.40 Apart from specific interpo-
lations, which are many, there are two substantial additions, the
first and last books. The attribution of these to Bhṛgu redactors
remains a matter of controversy.41 These are extraneous to the
story and appear to have been added mainly for didactic purposes.
Both additional books carry some of the stock-in-trade narratives
also found in the Vedic corpus, the Mahābhārata, and later in the
Purāṇas.­
It has been argued that the Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa evolved in five
stages. The initial version of the story was the narrative in Books
2–6. This was put together in the fifth-fourth centuries bc and
revised with periodic interpolations from the third century bc
to the first century ad. The text was by then in written form. In
the subsequent two centuries, Books 1 and 7 were added. From
the fourth to the twelfth centuries ad small passages were incor-
porated.42 The Rāmopākhyāna from the Mahābhārata seems to
be based on the second stage.43 The Bālakāṇḍa (Book 1) narrates
the antecedents to the main story. The Ayodhyākāṇḍa (Book 2),
as the name implies, focuses on the kingdom of Kosala. The
Araṇyakāṇḍa (Book 3) appropriately sees the rākṣasas in action
and the kidnapping of Sītā. The Kiṣkindhākāṇḍa (Book 4) is
essentially the book of the­vānaras. The Sundarakāṇḍa (Book 5)
sees Hanumān in Laṅkā. The Yuddhakāṇḍa (Book 6) narrates
39 A.K. Warder, Indian­Kavya­Literature, vol. II; R. Thapar, Exile­and­the­
Kingdom; Introduction in The­Rāmāyaṇa­of­Vālmīki, Vol.­II:­Ayodhyākāṇḍa,
ed. S. Pollock (gen. ed. R.P. Goldman).
40 C. Bulcke, Rāmakathā; J. Brockington, Righteous­Rāma.
41 12.57.40; N.J. Shende, “Authorship of the Ramayana”, 19–24.
42 J. Brockington, Righteous­Rāma, 348ff.; N. Sen, “Comparative Studies
in Oral Epic Poetry and the Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa”, 397–409; R. Antoine, Rama­
and­the­Bards: Epic­Memory­in­the­Ramayana; The­Rāmāyaṇa­of­Vālmīki,
Vol.­I:­Bālakāṇḍa, ed. and trans. R.P. Goldman, 14ff.
43 J. Brockington, Righteous­Rāma, 301.
222 The­Past­Before­Us­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­
the battle between Rāma and Rāvaṇa, the fire ordeal of Sītā and
Rāma’s triumphant return to Ayodhyā. The Uttarakāṇḍa (Book 7)
carries a kind of postscript on Rāvaṇa.
The last book also has the add-on of Sītā’s second fire ordeal
and the recitation of the epic by the sons of Rāma. Highlighting
heroic qualities, and the initial characteristics of a kingly hero
so evident in the Ayodhyākāṇḍa, the epic gradually absorbs the
idea of Rāma as an avatāra of Viṣṇu. Some have argued that this
is emphasized more in the later books than the earlier. The refer-
ences may be occasional in the earlier books but the insistence
is more emphatic in the later. Association with a deity becomes
an additional way of glorifying kingship. This kind of kingship
came to be more recognized by the Gupta period, but its projection
earlier was also a counter to other political systems.
The first and last books also present the major evidence for
the brahmanization of the text in the form of frequent references
to the four varṇas, the importance of dharma and daṇḍa to the
functioning of the king, Rāma as an avatāra of Viṣṇu, and Rāma-
bhakti being as important if not more so than the performance of
yajñas.44 Being put together over a period of time meant that the
context of the narrative changed with historical change—from
heroes in conflict to the complexities of kingdoms.
The basic story contains the raw material of all epic tales. But I
would like to suggest that, unlike the Mahābhārata, the Rāmāyaṇa
is not essentially the story of a family feud but rather of a confron-
tation between two types of society: the kingdom of Kosala and
the more diffused society of the rākṣasa.45 It is possible to place
the many other societies in the epic along a spectrum between
these two. The hero, Rāma, is the eldest son of king Daśaratha,
who rules from the city of Ayodhyā over the kingdom of Kosala
situated in the middle Ganges plain. Daśaratha’s sons are born after
the performance of a special ritual and grow up as accomplished
princes. The forests in the vicinity are the haunts of the rākṣasas,
who interfere with the sacrificial rituals of ascetics living in forest
44 “Rāmo­dharmabhṛtām­varaḥ”, in G. Bailey and M. Brockington, Epic­
Threads, 250–64; J. Brockington, Righteous­Rāma, 425ff.
45 This has been commented upon by earlier scholars. See A.A. MacDonell,
History­of­Sanskrit­Literature, 312–13.
The Rāmāyaṇa 223
hermitages. Rāma and his younger brother Lakṣmaṇa are called
upon to rid the forest of these demons. This they do and then pro-
ceed to the court of the neighbouring king, Janaka of Mithilā.
Here a svayamvara is being held for Janaka’s daughter Sītā. The
choice of husband is dependent on which of the princes gathered
there can lift and bend a massive bow. Rāma alone does so and
Sītā becomes his bride. On their return to Ayodhyā, Daśaratha
announces the installation of Rāma as the future king. But Rāma’s
stepmother Kaikeyī, prodded by her hunchback maid, reminds her
husband of a promise which he had made to her earlier. Kaikeyī
therefore demands that her own son, Bharata, should succeed
Daśaratha, and that Rāma be exiled for fourteen years. Daśaratha,
true to his word, sadly gives in. Rāma, Sītā, and Lakṣmaṇa, the
latter two voluntarily, go into exile, wandering in the forests of
the Vindhya hills. Bharata tries to persuade Rāma to return but he
refuses as it would be contrary to his father’s order.
Descriptions of the idyllic life in the forest are interrupted by
the kidnapping of Sītā by the powerful rākṣasa Rāvaṇa, who
takes her away in his aerial chariot to his home in Laṅkā. Rāma
and Lakṣmaṇa discover her whereabouts with the help of their
monkey ally Hanumān. In order to recover Sītā, Rāma goes into
battle against Rāvaṇa and, after a fierce confrontation, Rāvaṇa is
killed. Sītā is rescued but has to go through a fire ordeal to prove
her chastity. The three then return to Ayodhyā where, the period
of exile being completed, and Daśaratha having died meanwhile,
Rāma is crowned. His reign, projected as utopian, has been en-
capsulated in the phrase rāma-rājya.­
The role of Rāma as the incarnation of Viṣṇu is highlighted,
particularly in the first and seventh books, converting the epic into
a Bhāgavata text. The first book includes the appeal by the gods
to Viṣṇu to incarnate himself as Rāma in order to destroy the evil
Rāvaṇa. The seventh book narrates Sītā’s exile to the hermitage
of Vālmīki, where her twin sons, Kuśa and Lava, are born and
raised, and the poem is composed. This addition would also have
highlighted the status of Vālmīki.
The names of Sītā’s sons are curious since kuśīlavah was the
term used for bards, hardly an appropriate status for scions of
royalty. Vālmīki teaches the boys his epic poem of the deeds of
224 The­Past­Before­Us­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­
Rāma, and they recite it at Rāma’s aśvamedha sacrifice. The latter
is much moved and sends for Sītā but insists that she undergo yet
another fire ordeal, whereupon she protests her innocence and
appeals to her mother, the earth, and is immediately taken back
into the earth from where she was born.
In the earlier text, therefore, the lineage ended with Rāma,
who was still childless. By adding the story of his two sons, and
his bequeathing the northern and southern kingdoms of Kosala
to them, there was the possibility now of other descent groups
latching themselves onto one of the sons, and attempting thereby
to establish their status—as indeed happened later. The seventh
book also elaborates upon the high status of Rāvaṇa, making him
a suitable enemy for Viṣṇu incarnated as Rāma. The fading out of
the ruling lineage in both epics is crucial, suggesting the end of
an age. In the Mahābhārata succession goes through Parikṣit, the
still-born foetus revived by Kṛṣṇa, and in the Rāmāyaṇa it goes
through Kuśa and Lava, effectively low-status bards.
The question of whether the Rāmāyaṇa was a collation of ākhyā­-
nas currently familiar and therefore remaining a trifle disjointed
in the epic, or whether it was conceived as a single narrative,
remains controversial.46 Where the Dasaratha­Jātaka initially
parallels the story of the Ayodhyākāṇḍa, there is also the much-
discussed Rāmopākhyāna in the Mahābhārata which concentrates
on later events, the central feature being the kidnapping of Sītā,
and follows more closely the Vālmīki narrative.47 Rāma refuses
to take Sītā back, irrespective of her relations with Rāvaṇa.48
But the gods, joined by the spirit of the dead Daśaratha, proclaim
her innocence. This is reminiscent of the celestial voices which
proclaim the innocence of Śakuntalā in the Mahābhārata.49 It ap-
pears to have been an early epic device which was later changed
to fire ordeals, and rings associated with memory.
46 Discussed in The­Rāmāyaṇa­of­Vālmīki,­I:­Bālākaṇḍa, trans. R.P. Gold-
man, 29ff.; The­Rāmāyaṇa­of­Vālmīki, Vol.­II:­Ayodhyākāṇḍa, trans. S. Pollock,
9ff.; see also R. Gombrich, “The Vessantara­Jātaka, the Rāmāyaṇa and the
Dasaratha­Jātaka”, 427–37.
47 3.258–75.
48 3.275.14.
49 I.62ff.
The Rāmāyaṇa 225
If the story is seen analytically in terms of the constituents of a
folktale, then it is strikingly consistent. The Rāmāyaṇa seems to
combine an original adventure narrative with a romance genre,
and the interweaving is so effective that it passes for a single story
based on the structure of a folktale. Embedded in the story is the
epic narrative, which follows the stereotype common to such
narratives, focusing on the trials and tribulations of the hero in
many cultures. He has to be of an aristocratic or warrior family
and his birth comes about as a result of a specially performed
ritual: this marks him out as unique. He shows his prowess in
attacking enemies, demons, and supernatural beings, and also in
performing a feat by which he wins the hand of the heroine.50 He
is denied his legitimate inheritance through the machinations of
a close kinsman or kinswoman and goes into exile. The heroine
frequently accompanies him. She is kidnapped, and this forms
the second part of the story. She is located and allies are found to
help the hero recover her. The battle with the villain is described
at length and is followed by the victory of the hero. The action
moves out of cosmological time and, momentarily at least, enters
linear time.
Exile is a frequent device in epics as it provides a condition out-
side the normal. This allows a play of fantasy on person and event,
the breaking of convention and an occasion for the bard to extend
the story by weaving in other narratives. Given that every forest
was said to be infested with predators, demons, and supernatural
beings, and could be a place of extreme pain, exile in a forest al-
lowed for the display of heroic qualities.51 The heroes are less
the boastful warriors given to sumptuous consumption and more
the ideal kṣatriyas. Nevertheless, the forest poses something of a
challenge not only from the rākṣasas but also from the ṛṣis whom
the heroes are protecting, and who symbolize a different kind of
authority—a moral authority feared even by the gods. If the forest
is the background to the romantic narrative it is also the haunt of
renouncers, opters out, ascetics, those who have forsaken social
50 V. Propp, The­Morphology­of­the­Folktale; idem, Theory­and­History­of­
Folklore; S. Thompson, Motif-Index­of­Folk­Literature.
51 Rāmāyaṇa,­2.25.4, 13.
226 The­Past­Before­Us­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­
obligations.52 The culture of the rākṣasas is depicted as alien, and
this is enhanced by their being demonized and thereby treated
with contempt. Rāma has to protect the ṛṣis but also come to terms
with their power—to accept their authority. The forest is an area
of ambivalence where the future of chiefdoms and kingdoms is
being contested prior to the main contest on the battlefield. But
neither can claim a clear articulation of its aspirations.
The­Authors
The first and seventh books carry some information of a bio-
graphical nature on Vālmīki, which is in keeping with the general
practice that some information be given about the author. But the
information is sparse to the point of being almost negligible and
largely fanciful. He is said to be a ṛṣi living with other such in
an āśrama on the banks of the Tamasa. He observes a pair of
krauñca birds courting, and one of them is shot by a Niṣāda hunter.
The grief of the other inspires him to compose a verse which be-
comes the prototype śloka and is immediately memorized by his
Bharadvāja disciple.53 The grief of the surviving mate evokes in
Vālmīki the empathy to tell the story of another grief, the story of
Sītā.54 It is ironic that the composition eventually undermined the
grief of Sītā by glorifying the actions of Rāma, whose rejection
of Sītā was the cause of her grief.
As in the Mahābhārata, the frame of the story is a ritual occa-
sion and there is an echo of earlier times when the recitation of
ākhyānas punctuated the rituals of the aśvamedha. Here too the
epic recitation overwhelms the ritual. The Mahābhārata refers
to Vālmīki as a distinguished ṛṣi, as the author of a particular
form of śloka, and as the son of Garuḍa.55 The antecedents of
Vālmīki are unclear, although he is mentioned as a Bhārgava in the
Uttarakāṇḍa, as also by Aśvaghoṣa, and in the Viṣṇu­Purāṇa.56
52 R. Thapar, “Renunciation: The Making of a Counter-culture”, in idem,
Cultural­Pasts, 876–913.
53 1.2.4ff.
54 1.4.6–7.
55 2.7.14, 3.83.103–4, 6.59.29, 5.99.11; G.H. Bhatt, “On Vālmīki”, 1–4.
56 Rāmāyaṇa, 7.84.16; Buddhacarita 1.43; Viṣṇu­Purāṇa, 3.3.18; J. Brocking-
ton, The­Sanskrit­Epics, 394; C. Bulcke, “About Materials for the Biography of
The Rāmāyaṇa 227
002
0
sertemoliK
seitsanyD
dna
,snalC
,secalP
tnatropmI
eroM
eht
fo
snoitacoL
:3
paM
E
G
A
N
Ganga
R
A
Y
L
A noS
A
M
I
K a r a k o r a m R Ind E us A T Beas H G Ya a m ng u a na labm ahC e g n a R a y h d n
G iV
h
s
u
mulehJ
banehC
ivaR
jeltuS
adam
raN
Tapi
K
Kabul
u
d
egnaR
nam
ia
n lu
S i
H
sudnI
dnamleH
LUBAK
AYEKEK
IHLED
AHEDIV
ālihtiM
āyhdoyA
ALASOK
IDEC
AYAHIAH
ATAKLOK
ĀHDNIKS.IK
idanahaM
5
retpahC
,3
paM
228 The­Past­Before­Us­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­
If the story was taken over from the bards, a concession seems
to have been made to them by brāhmaṇa authorship in naming
Rāma’s twin sons Kuśa and Lava. As such, their caste ranking
should create a problem.57 In a lineage-based society the bards
had a high status, but later, when caste society is well established,
their ranking is low.
Both terms have another meaning and are used for the sacred
grass in the ritual of sacrifice: the upper grass being kuśa and the
lower, lava. The kuśa is also a small wooden pin used as a marker
in recitation.58 In one text they are treated with suspicion. Their
low status made them suitable recruits as spies for the state. It
also recommends that a courtesan’s son from the age of 8 should
work as a kuśīlava.59
The kuśīlava are included among professional actors, as are
cāraṇas, and they are paid wages so that they do not take to rob-
bing people.60 Such occupations are not normally associated with
kṣatriyas,­but the kṣatriya ambience might have given them status.
However, this was not generally conceded. One text says that they
have to be treated as śūdras, another that they are a sankīrṇa-jāti
(mixed caste), and in yet another that they should be banished
from towns.61
The Rāmāyaṇa mentions that the sūtas and māgadhas, as bards,
should awaken the king in the morning by their compositions.62
Daśaratha’s sūta,­Sumantra, is his friend as well as his eulogist
but also has the status of a minister.63 Mention is made of the
Vālmīki, Author of the First Rāmāyaṇa”, 346–8; see also R.P. Goldman,“Vālmīki
and the Bhṛgu Connection”, 69ff.
57 J. Gonda, History­of­Indian­Literature, vol. III, 333; H. Jacobi, Das­
Rāmāyaṇa:­Geschichte­und­Inhalt­nebst­Concordanz­der­gedruckten­Recensionen,
62ff.; G.H. Bhatt, “On Vālmīki”, 1–4; Manu’s­Code­of­Law, 3.155, 158; Gautama­
Dharmasūtra, 15.18; Āpastamba­Dharmasūtra, ed. G. Buhler, 1.1.3.11–12, 2.25.4;
Rāmāyaṇa, 1.4.4–9ff.
58 7.58.4–9; cf. 1.4.3–11, 7.84.6–15.
59 Arthaśāstra, 2.27.6–7.
60 Arthaśāstra, 4.1.58–65.
61 Arthaśāstra, 3.7.32; Mahābhārata, 12.69.49.
62 2.82.8.
63 1.7.1–2, 1.8.2–5.
The Rāmāyaṇa 229
purāṇavid, the vedavid, and the sārathi.64 The story of Sītā’s
sons would tend to confirm the uneven relationship between the
brāhmaṇas and the bards. Is the recitation by the twins a hint
that the composition was originally by the bards and was then
reformulated by Vālmīki, a brāhmaṇa, as an epic poem? There is
once again the curious play on authorship and kinship. If Vyāsa
was both the author of the Mahābhārata and the grandfather of
the heroes, here Vālmīki was both the author of the Rāmāyaṇa
and the foster-father of the sons of Rāma.
Table III
Abbreviated Descent List
Manu
Ikṣvāku
Vikukṣi Nimi
Mithi Janaka
Devarata
Sagara
Dilīpa
Raghu
Aja
Daśaratha Sīradhvaja
Rāma
64 2.13.17, 2.14.1, 2.29.4, 6.116.19.
230 The­Past­Before­Us­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­
Genealogy­and­Caste
The epic is a validation of kṣatriya society, so its social concerns
are limited to an elite and not to ordinary people. The focus is on
the kin groups of the rājās. In the transition to kingship the group
expands to include non-kin. Rituals of legitimation continue to
be a necessity. Daśaratha has to perform the putreṣṭi-medha and
the aśvamedha to obtain sons.65 This is not the world of ordinary
people. Kṣatriya status derives from birth, so genealogies are ap-
pended for both Daśaratha and Janaka.66 They are recited at the
wedding, an appropriate occasion to claim status.
Rāma’s ancestry begins with Brahmā and comes down via
various ṛṣis to Manu and his son Ikṣvāku, and continues with
this lineage. The next segment is a descent list of heroes covering
many generations. Some are just names, and a few other—such
as Mandhātṛ, Sagara, and Dilīpa—performed heroic acts. The
genealogy is repeated with marginal changes in the Ayodhyākāṇḍa,
suggesting this might have been the earlier one.67 This also par-
allels the repetition of the genealogy in the Mahābhārata. The
lineage is described as that of the Ikṣvākus. A break is suggested
by Asita attacking the Haihayas, Tālajaṅghas, and others of the
Yadu lineage, which would have included the Vṛṣṇis and Cedis.
His relationship to the successor Sagara is not clear. Both epics
suggest hostility between the lineage of the heroes and that of
the Yadus, which might reflect an age-old enmity, a difference in
polity, or competition to control valuable territory, as for example
the route going to the peninsula—the dakṣināpatha—traversing
the Vindhyas and crossing the Narmada. The binary is underlined
in their belonging to two different major lineages—the Sūryavaṃśa
and the Candravaṃśa.
Janaka’s genealogy is shorter and, significantly, does not go back
to a deity. It begins with the Nimi, also descended from Ikṣvāku,
thus making them collateral lineages. Only the eldest sons are
named in both descent lists. Association with the gods underlines
status and divine connections, but genealogies seek to establish
legitimacy, and it is important that legitimacy be maintained
65 Rāmāyaṇa, 2.40.19–20.
66 1.69.15ff., 1.70.1–14.
67 2.102.2ff.
The Rāmāyaṇa 231
throughout. The central event focuses on rightful succession,
with the right of the eldest son being subverted when Rāma is
sent into exile. Problems over succession occur between paired
brothers, Rāma and Bharata, Rāvaṇa and Vibhīṣaṇa, and Vālin
and Sugrīva.68 Genealogies are intended to underline kinship con-
nections and clearly the emphasis here is on the two collateral
lines of Daśaratha and Janaka.69 By including the genealogical
portions and maintaining therefore that the epics recorded a slice
of the itihāsa-purāṇa tradition, an element of believed history
was introduced.
With the establishing of a kingdom, caste becomes an important
source of identity. Interpolations, even when mentioning caste, are
not altogether arbitrary or without a historical context. A height-
ened consciousness of caste in the late books parallels the Śānti
and Anuśāsana parvans in the Mahābhārata. This is noticeable in
the elevated status of the brāhmaṇa in contrast to the śūdra, and
the prohibition on the mixing of castes.70 The reign of Rāma will
ensure the system of varṇas;71 and references to varṇas and śūdras
increase in the later sections. The abject condition of the sūdra is
clear from the story of Rāma killing Śambūka, the śūdra who had
dared to become an ascetic (Book 7). Rāma’s action is justified
as conforming to the rules of varṇa.72 This contrasts with Rāma’s
earlier acceptance of food from Śabarī of the forest-dwellers,73
who is described as a śramaṇī and is therefore of the heterodox
group. Interestingly, his first ally in exile is Guha, the chief of the
niṣādajātyaḥ, the Niṣāda clan.74
Chiefdoms
The function of the Vālmīki version in the propagation of Vaiṣṇava
belief and practice has received great attention. This has tended
to divert interest from other aspects which are significant. I would
68 2.16.33, 2.97–8, 6.10.1–11, 6.51.1–26.
69 N.R. Wagle, “A Study of Kinship Groups in the Ramayana of Valmiki”,
17–142.
70 1.6.16–17, 7.65.6–7.
71 1.1.75, 5.33.11, 6.113.29.
72 7.67.
73 3.70.6–9; J. Brockington, Righteous Rāma, 158.
74 2.44.9ff., 2.78.1ff.
232 The­Past­Before­Us­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­
like to argue that Vālmīki’s original version of the story symbol-
izes the triumph of kingship, and the epic therefore becomes a
charter of validation for kingdoms, which would be one reason
among many for its currency in later times. This introduces the
perception of what is believed to be the past, as expressed in the
epic, and as an element of the historical tradition. This element is
further expressed in different versions in different periods over
recompositions of the story, and the variations reflect historical
change.
I have tried to show in the previous chapter that the conscious-
ness of historical change in an epic form is articulated in the
Mahābhārata by the two types of societies which emerge from the
narrative and didactic sections, indicating the change from lineage-
based chiefships to kingdoms. In the Rāmāyaṇa, the consciousness
of historical change uses the same categories but expresses it by
a sharper contrast. Here, kingship is not an abstract notion but a
functioning reality. The rākṣasa and the vānara communities, to
which respectively Rāvaṇa and Hanumān belong, are closer in
form and spirit to chiefships, whereas the kingdom of Rāma is the
exemplar of early kingship. The hostility or the alliances in some
instances are symbolic of the fading away of the earlier society
and the increasing success of kingdoms.
The dichotomy, however, is neither deliberate nor always con-
sistent. Within each there is more of some and less of some. Thus,
the kingdom of Ayodhyā, recently evolved, is one where the insti-
tutions of monarchy are present but perhaps not as yet fully
entrenched. This can sometimes result in anachronisms or con-
tradictory situations. Similarly, the depiction of rākṣasa activities
in the forest is different from their activities in the city of Lankā,
where the context appears to approximate kingship although it is
not actually so. The society of the rākṣasas tends to conform to
the organization of chiefships. There is also a variety of forest-
dwellers, such as vānaras, who would be included in this range.
The later editors, familiar with kingdoms and courtly norms,
were nevertheless attempting to retain a sense of the earlier nar-
rative and its depiction of a different social context. This would
suggest the awareness that the text being redacted related to a
different and earlier kind of society, else once again it would have
The Rāmāyaṇa 233
been recomposed in an idiom of contemporary times—as hap-
pened in later adaptations of the narrative.
Vālmīki’s rākṣasas may well have been entirely fanciful. But
since they are described as having the appurtenances of a human
society, the assumptions implicit in these descriptions need to be
analysed. Their polity and society follows a distinctive pattern. In
the earlier books, the societies of both Kosala and the rākṣasas are
relatively simple and the rākṣasas approximate closely to human
society. The rākṣasas are seen more as enemies than as demons,
although they magically transform themselves into animals and
creatures of fantasy. Rāvaṇa’s wife refers to him as āryaputra, in-
dicating status and nobility.75 The differences were of form and
patterns of living in two contesting societies.
Unlike kingdoms, there are no boundaries to their territories and
they wander at will, claiming the forests as their territory. The city
of Laṅkā, being an island, is perforce bounded but the territorial
control of Rāvaṇa is never clearly defined. The location of Laṅkā,
however well-fortified, remains vague and somewhat fictitious in
its exaggerated wealth. The rākṣasas are widely distributed and
tied by kinship links rather than territorial proximity. In place of
kingship they seem to function as a chiefship, and when in groups
they are referred to as gaṇas.76
The rākṣasas have virtually no genealogies, although reference
is made to some ancestors. In a late book, some of the rākṣasas
are said to belong to the Paulastya line which also originated in
the middle Ganges plain at Vaiśāli, but little is said of their de-
scent.77 Nevertheless, kinsmen are of considerable importance, as
for instance in the deliberations of Rāvaṇa when Laṅkā is under
attack.78
The term senā is used for the army in the early sections and
military formations such as the akṣauhīni are more frequently
mentioned in the later sections.79 The four wings of the army are
75 J.L. Brockington, “Religious Attitudes in Vālmīki’s Rāmāyaṇa”, 108–30.
76 5.41.12, 5.46.14.
77 Rāmāyaṇa 7.2.3ff.; F.E. Pargiter, Ancient­Indian­Historical­Tradition,
241ff.
78 6.6.1.ff., 6.7.1ff.
79 J. Brockington, Righteous­Rāma, 134–5.
234 The­Past­Before­Us­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­
listed,80 but these appear to be formal descriptions. Among weap-
ons, the largest number of references is to bows and arrows, which
would rather contradict the conventional four wings.81 Whereas
the armies had regular weapons, the monkey forces fought with
trees and stones, as did some of the rākṣasas.82
The association with magic allows the rākṣasas­to assume vari-
ous forms and to materialize weaponry of an exalted kind, sug-
gestive of poetic fantasy. Thus, the aerial chariot is a characteristic
feature of Rāvaṇa’s equipment. The demonizing of the rākṣasa and
an association with magic could be born of fear of the enemy.­The
rākṣasas have the characteristics of supernatural beings, but can
more often perhaps be viewed as fantasized aliens. The physical
descriptions of the rākṣasas, including Rāvaṇa, deploy phrases
that are conventionally used in other texts for forest-dwellers such
as Śabaras and Niṣādas. Thus, it is repeatedly said that Rāvaṇa
or the rākṣasas look like a mass of black antimony—nīlāṅjana;
they are short-statured and with bloodshot eyes; they resemble
mountains and roar like the thunder—a formulaic description of
forest-dwellers.83 Hence also the frequent epithet of megha in their
names, as for instance Meghanāda. The elements highlighted are
their violence, their magical power to metamorphose like the gods,
and their intemperate sexuality.84
To these may be added the even more significant characteristic,
which is that they do not observe the varṇāśrama-dharma, and
therefore rules of social hierarchy, commensality, consanguinity,
and pollution. In fact they reverse the rules. They do have some
social differentiations, but not deeply marked and not derived
from caste. Śūrpaṇakhā’s actions suggest that their women are
forthcoming, and she is a contrast to the submissive Sītā. Rāma
and his brothers are monogamous but Rāvaṇa is polygamous
and picks up wives wherever he chooses. Rāma was expected to
protect the four varṇas.85 By implication, he would be opposed
80 2.73.9, 2.107.11, 3.28.2.
81 J. Brockington, Righteous­Rāma, 140.
82 6.95.17–18.
83 5.47.7, 6.48.36, 5.1.29.
84 The­Rāmāyaṇa­of­Vālmīki, Vol.­III:­Araṇyakāṇḍa, trans. S. Pollock, 68ff.,
2.108.8ff.
85 5.33.11.
The Rāmāyaṇa 235
to those that did not organize their society accordingly, such as
the rākṣasas.
There is a small distinction, however, in the depiction of the
rākṣasas of the forest and those of Laṅkā. The latter observe some
of the familiar forms, such as Rāvaṇa living in a palace, although
they can relapse into ways regarded as uncivilized. The contrast
is made apparent in the Sundarakāṇḍa, where the recitations and
the yajñas of the rākṣasas in Lankā resemble those of brāhmaṇa
ascetics. But these are called yātudhāna, referring to sorcery rather
than to ritual.86 A difference in religion is indicated by the asso-
ciation of the rākṣasas with caityas. These were the locations of
non-brāhmaṇa cults and centres of yakṣa worship, among others.
As sacred spaces and funerary mounds they were segregated from
Vedic ritual. Laṅkā has a large caitya covered with jewels.87
As a general category the rākṣasas are referred to as anārya,88
where ārya is one who is to be respected. Their being alien is
height ened by a different set of norms, but their magical powers
and violence are feared, a fear which is exaggerated by their habi-
tat being the unknown forest. All that is thought to be contrary is
imputed to them. This makes them different from other anāryas
or mlecchas, who are outside the pale of the varṇāśrama-dharma
but are still familiar—such as some clans of the north-west.
There is mention neither of plough agriculture nor of merchants,
yet Laṅkā is said to be fabulously wealthy, its buildings adorned
with trimmings of gold and gems.89 The source of this wealth
is not mentioned nor any association with wealth-producing
activities. It may therefore have been poetic exaggeration. The
rākṣasas who lived off the forest require large tracts for hunting,
for grazing, and for swidden agriculture; they would therefore
see encroachers wishing to clear and settle in the forest as natural
enemies. Even when there is a distinct shift in their representation,
as for instance Rāvaṇa in Laṅkā, and they are not restricted to the
forest, they represent a different political and social system, one
which was required to be terminated in the interests of the exten-
sion of kingship and the sources from which kingdoms derived
86 5.3.26–8, 5.4.12.
87 5.13.15–17.
88 3.17.19.
89 D.R. Chanana, The­Spread­of­Agriculture­in­Northern­India.
236 The­Past­Before­Us­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­
their sustenance. The rākṣasas seem to derive their wealth only
from forests and mineral resources. Vālmīki’s demonizing of the
rākṣasas is both the demeaning of clan society as well as of the
earlier polities prior to kingship. This becomes more obvious in
the later alternative versions.
However, a sharp dichotomy between the two societies is not
invariably present and there is a gradation from the vānaras to
the forest rākṣasas, to the rākṣasas of Laṅkā, to the people of
Ayodhyā. In the positioning of various societies, conquest would
more likely have brought about a disruptive cultural change. The
rākṣasas were undergoing a slow mutation in adapting to the cul-
ture of kingdoms, cities, and castes. This was accelerated by the
enclaves of settlements in the form of the āśramas of ṛṣis. Such
settlements seemingly allowed various cultures to coexist. But,
with increasing patronage to the hermitages by royalty, their pre-
sence would have aggravated the pressure of change on the forest-
dwellers. This is reflected in a comparison with the Paumacariyam,
as we shall see, where the descriptions in the later text refer to a
changed landscape from the forests of the Rāmāyaṇa.
The­Enhancement­of­Kingship
The geographical horizon of the text extended from the kingdom
of Kosala in the middle Ganges plain into Central India. The
northern links are implicit in the Kosala–Kekeya alliance and
are referred to marginally, as when Bharata visits his maternal
uncle. The forest to which Rāma goes is a few days’ journey
from Ayodhyā and across the Ganges. The boundary of Kosala is
known to Rāma, who refers to their first night outside the territory
of Kosala.90 The major part of the narrative, the theme of exile,
seems to be geographically located in the Ganges plain impinging
on Central India.91 The condition of exile also serves to emphasize
90 2.47.2.
91 This question relates to the complex discussion on the location of Laṅkā.
Most scholars have located it in the Vindhyas or in the Amarakantaka region,
and some locate it more to the east of this region. I have suggested a location
in the region of Kaliṅga rather than the popularly believed Sri Laṅkā. See
R. Thapar, “The Rāmāyaṇa: Theme and Variation”, in idem, Cultural Pasts,
The Rāmāyaṇa 237
the contrast between the kingdom and the forest. The kingdom
is the rājya and the territory is the deśa/rāṣṭra/janapada/viṣaya­
with its town (pura or nagara), the term paurajānapada denoting
the people of the territory. The paura (townspeople) are different
from those of the territory of Kosala, the paurajānapada.92
Economic differences are apparent. Kosala is associated with
agriculture and its wealth is measured in terms of storehouses
stocked with grain together with the activities of traders and
merchants.93 Although agriculture, cattle-rearing, and trade are
mentioned as the three occupations of the vaiśya, the plough is
referred to in the later books.94 Merchants active in the city and
the span of occupations associated with urban life occur more
naturally in descriptions of Ayodhyā, and in the first and last
books, although passing mention is made of shops and markets
in other parts of the text.95 Descriptions of Ayodhyā mention the
royal highway—the spine of urban centres—as also open spaces,
gardens, orchards, many-storeyed buildings and palaces, horses,
elephants, and chariots. Courtesans are another characteristic
feature and accompany the retinue that bids farewell to Rāma
when he leaves for the forest.96 Incidental references, however,
indicate that palaces were perhaps still rather simple buildings.
The distraught Kauśalyā who grieves on Rāma’s departure is said
to fall on the dust-covered floor.97
Wealth is demonstrated by quantities of grain—dhanadhānya—
while grain and jewels fill the kośa­and the princes gave magni-
ficent gifts.98 Coins are not referred to, although they existed at the
647–79. A recent and plausible attempt has been made to plot the geography of
this exile using topo-sheets, Google Earth, and field surveys, and this confirms
the area of the Vindhyas. S. Agashe, The­Geography­of­the­Ramayana, forth-
coming.
92 1.12.10–12.
93 1.5.17.
94 1.38.19, 7.17.30.
95 1.5, 1.6, 2.6.12, 2.13.2, 2.106.13, 1.31.4–7, 4.32.5, 2.61.7ff., 2.77.12–15,
7.62.11–12.
96 2.32.3, 45.19–21.
97 2.17.8, 37.10, 40.25.
98 2.30.17–18, 2.15.2–3, 2.29.5–17, 1.6.6.
238 The­Past­Before­Us­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­
time of the text. Even the word niṣka, sometimes taken to be a coin,
occurs sparingly.99 The description of Ayodhyā as an urban centre
is familiar from descriptions of other cities elsewhere. Wealth is
also measured by the giving of gifts, either to brāhmaṇas on the
conclusion of a ritual (such as the funeral rites for Daśaratha),
or to bards when patrons are pleased with their eulogies, or even
when elder kinsmen wish to show their affection for the younger
ones (such as the gifts to Bharata from his maternal kinsmen, the
Kekeyas). Cattle, horses, elephants, and gold are the preferred ob-
jects of gift-giving, and although land is referred to, as are houses
and grain, these are limited to the kingdom of Kosala.100
The emergent state was dependent on economic activities bring-
ing in revenue and ensuring a full treasury. Administration was
necessary for regular collection of revenue and its redistribution to
the agencies of governance. Agricultural taxes are not mentioned
but were probably known as reference is made to viṣṭi­(labour
tax).101 Coercion was a fallback should peasants, artisans, and mer-
chants resist providing revenue. Such resistance is referred to in
the Jātakas, where peasants migrate from a kingdom that imposes
oppressive taxes.102 The city was now the centre of administration
and exchange, reflecting a socio-economic change. Its prosperity
and multiple activities could have been exaggerated, as obviously
were the measurements of its size. These were more a metaphor
of expansion than meant to be taken literally. There is no mention
of the known cities of the time, such as Rājagṛha in Magadha, or
Takṣaśila in Gandhāra, or Śrāvasti and Vaiśāli nearer home.
The concern with primogeniture reflects a kingship in which
hereditary authority has passed into the hands of a particular
family whose legitimacy is based on descent—hence Daśaratha’s
anxiety at not having a son to succeed him.103 Status is further
emphasized by the introduction of legends narrating the lives of
royal ancestors, even though the actual order of descent in the
99 J. Brockington, Righteous Rāma, 62ff.
100 2.64.17ff., 2.28.7, 29.11–16, 71.2–3, 6.113.41.
101 6.115.4.
102 Gaṇḍaṭindu­Jātaka, no. 520, in The Jātaka.
103 Rāmāyaṇa, 1.8.1ff.
The Rāmāyaṇa 239
Rāmāyaṇa does not tally with those in other texts.104 Whereas in
the Jātaka story Vessantara is exiled by the angry subjects of his
father, in the Rāmāyaṇa the citizens of Ayodhyā, unhappy with
Daśaratha’s decision to exile Rāma, can do nothing to change it.
The Ayodhyākāṇḍa is the validation of kingship.105 Genealogy
as one agency of this record becomes more important than before
and has to be underlined and repeated. The king is the protec-
tor of dharma and of the prajā.106 This involves enforcing the
varṇāśrama-dharma, a use of authority that is different from the
system of the chiefships, or from that of Buddhist thinking that
prevailed in many gaṇa-saṅghas of the middle Ganges plain. The
concentration of power is expressed in the will of the king—which
should not be opposed.107
The characteristics of an acceptable kingdom lie in fulfilling its
norms: economic prosperity where revenues exceed expenditure,
the observance of varṇāśrama-dharma, the prevalence of justice
so that crimes are punished, and the welfare of the subjects.108
The sabhā, or assembly of the heads of clans central to the func-
tioning of chiefships, was replaced by the mantrīs,­amātyas, and
pariṣad of the royal court.109 The absence of kingship and the evils
of a kingless state—arājya—are conditions of chaos. Kingship
poses new problems for the epic genre, the focus being now on
hereditary royal power as an established norm,110 in the hands of
a single family. Rāma, the hero, becomes the ideal king because
of his concern for the dharma necessary to dynastic stability
and power. However, listening to public opinion has less to do
with politics and focuses on the chastity of Sītā, which Rāma is
unwilling to defend.
Rāma is required to seek legitimacy through performing Vedic
rituals. The narrative is generally not interrupted by homilies,
104 Viṣṇu­Purāṇa, 4.5, 4.2.
105 The­Rāmāyaṇa­of­Vālmīki, Vol.­II:­Ayodhyākāṇḍa, trans. S. Pollock.
106 There is a dire description of a land without a king, 2.61.7–25.
107 Rāmāyaṇa, 2.46.18.
108 Cf. 2.94.37–58.
109 2.30.15–20.
110 2.61; Introduction in The­Rāmāyaṇa­of­Vālmīki, Vol.­II:­Ayodhyākāṇḍa,
trans. S. Pollock, 10ff.
240 The­Past­Before­Us­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­
but there is an interesting list of errors that a king should avoid.111
It starts with patronage to people who are nāstika and anṛtaka—
those who do not believe and who lie—indicating a clear sectarian
turn with opposition to heterodoxy. In a state without a king there
would be no one to protect the subjects and maintain the laws.112
Qualities of kingly concern and administration are significantly
different from the ethic and practices that ensure the success of
oligarchies.113
A distinction between the two societies of Kosala and Lankā,
therefore, lies in the centrality of kingship in the first and the ab-
sence or at best the marginality of this in the second. This absence
means no rain and therefore no cultivation, no authority, wealth,
gardens, sacrificial rituals, festivals, sages, and no security for the
rich. Justice would be denied, the tellers of tales would lack an
audience, and the army would be ineffective. Destructive atheists
would thrive. The law of the fishes—mātsyanyāya—would prevail.
The reign of the righteous king, rāma-rājya, is in sharp contrast
with all this.114
The power of the king of Kosala is somewhat circumscribed
by the assembly, because Daśaratha has to consult the sabhā when
he decides that Rāma should succeed him and be crowned.115 At
the same time, he speaks of primogeniture being the norm among
the Ikṣvākus. Bharata refuses to take up the kingship during the
lifetime of his elder brother.116 Exiling Rāma, on the other hand, is
fulfilling a personal promise: Daśaratha takes a unilateral decision
and does not consult those whom he did on the earlier occasion.
The question of primogeniture also triggers off Lakṣmaṇa’s sug-
gestion that Rāma should not acquiesce so easily to his exile and
that the two brothers could consider reversing the decision.117 This
suggests a palace coup, the likes of which would not have been
easy in a chiefship.
111 2.56–58.
112 2.61.7–22.
113 Cf. Rāmāyaṇa, 2.94.9.ff., 2.56–8, with Dīgha­Nikāya, II.76.
114 6.116.80–90.
115 2.1.35–6.
116 2.107.1ff.
117 2.18.8–12.
The Rāmāyaṇa 241
The importance of councillors and functionaries, i.e. mantrīs
and dharmapālakas, is more marked in the late sections of the
text. It was the king’s duty to protect the people, and in return for
this he received the ṣaḍbhāga or one-sixth share of the produce
as tax.118 The sabhā­is also addressed as the pariṣad. The paura-
jānapada-janāḥ suggests a continuity with the earlier assemblies
and with janapadas.119 The latter also occur as units of territory,
together with rāṣṭra,­deśa, and later viśaya. Towns are mentioned
as pura,­paṭṭana, and nagara, and are more frequently associated
with activities in Kosala than with those of the rākṣasas—even
those inhabiting the town of Laṅkā. Grāmas and mahāgrāmas
are different categories of villages in Kosala.120 Scattered in the
countryside of Kosala are a variety of forts and the boundaries
are well defined.121
The forest is also home to the hermitages of the ṛṣis and this
serves to highlight two features. One is the dichotomy between
the settlement and the wasteland. The grāma­was the known, the
orderly, the predictable, and the araṇya was unknown, with no
recognizable order; it was where the unexpected could happen.
Those who habitually live in the one were unfamiliar to the other,
hence the contrast between the people of Kosala and the rākṣasa.
Hermitages became the vanguard of the settlement encroaching
into the forest and not unexpectedly are attacked by those who
live in the forest. The hermitage is a threshold condition between
settlement and forest, for it is peopled by ascetics who do not
fully conform to the mores of either the settled habitations or the
forest-dwellers. The rākṣasa attacks on the hermitages are con-
sistent. The resentment seems also to have arisen against the ṛṣis
bringing in a new culture, changing the habitat of forest-dwellers
through agriculture, exchange, and the clearing of forests. Rāvaṇa
performing sacrifices seems to have been an afterthought.
The Rāmāyaṇa eulogizes the kingdom as nurturing the sour-
ces of wealth and its administration, maintaining the distinc-
tion of caste and hierarchy, and supporting those who were the
118 2.69.18, 3.5.10–13.
119 2.103.24, 2.2.18.
120 2.1.35, 2.51.3.
121 2.94.44, 6.3.19, 2.43.7.
242 The­Past­Before­Us­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­
legitimizers of the system.122 This is not characteristic of rākṣasa
society. In juxtaposing two systems and endorsing one as histori-
cally superior to the other, the Rāmāyaṇa can be seen as a charter
of validation for kingdoms established in areas of erstwhile chief-
ships. Alternative polities had to be discredited.
Yet another theme introduced into the text through interpo-
lations, which became a powerful support to the political and
historical role of kingship, was Vaiṣṇava bhakti. It heightens the
transformation of the hero. Whether the idea of the divinity of
Rāma can be traced to the earliest composition, or whether it was
introduced in the later revision, has been debated.123 The emphasis
on divinity is much heavier in the later sections.
The depiction of Rāvaṇa in the late books contradicts the early
ones. He is said to be of brāhmaṇa descent who undertook the
severest asceticism for a thousand years.124 Subsequent to this he
obtained a boon that he would not be killed by either god or asura,
but did not include man in the request as he thought no man would
have the power to kill him. Perhaps it was the confidence which
the boon gave him that led to his misdemeanours.125 Thus, it was
a god in the form of a man who was responsible for his death.
This image of Rāvaṇa was an oblique projection of the greatness
of Rāma in bringing low such a powerful figure.
The text changes its function when Rāma becomes primarily an
avatāra of Viṣṇu, and as such a necessary part of the literature of
Vaiṣṇavism through the new cult of Bhāgavatism. The preferred
popular mode of worship was bhakti (devotion). Indra, earlier
associated with Vedic hymns and sacrificial rituals, is now cut to
size in the redacted versions. In one place, Rāma is said to have
divine virtues that equate him with Indra; elsewhere, when Indra
and Brahmā speak of Rāma as the creator of the universe, the
122 Rāmāyaṇa, 2.61.7ff., 2.94.10–59ff.
123 The­Rāmāyaṇa­of­Vālmīki,­Vol.­III:­Araṇyakāṇḍa, trans. S. Pollock;
L. Gonzales-Reiman, “The Divinity of Rāma in the Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmīki”,
203–20.
124 Rāmāyaṇa, 3.30.17–18, 6.80.22.24, 1.14.5ff., 7.10.10ff.; Mahābhārata,
3.259.22ff., 3.265.23.
125 3.30.6–20.
The Rāmāyaṇa 243
reference is to Viṣṇu.126 It has been argued that the Rāma–Rāvaṇa
conflict was an updating, as it were, of the Indra–Vṛtra conflict of
the Ṛgveda,127 where Indra destroys the rākṣasas.128
The avatāra grew out of the historical process of acculturation,
both in channelling Vaiṣṇava beliefs and values into new areas as
well as by incorporating cults from these areas into Vaiṣṇavism.
This was useful to the functioning of a state, providing a new
identity, binding diverse groups into focusing on a single deity,
and giving direction to ritual and belief. Its technique was less
to proselytize directly, as did the Buddhists and the Jainas, but to
incorporate and absorb. Organizational techniques were probably
borrowed from the Sramanic sects, especially the reference to a
text and the association of visual representation with the text. But
these developments evolved slowly.
Making Rāma an avatāra of Viṣṇu reflected on the nature of
kingship. Incarnation introduced the idea of the divinity of the
king—although Rāma is treated as a mortal in the earlier sec-
tions.129 The epic hero in the early composition had a relationship
with the gods that was close but distinct. In a further stage the hero
can, on occasion, act like a god. In the final revised version he
is the incarnation of a god.130 The king’s analogy with a god stems
from his function to protect, which goes back to the early rājā,­and
to ensure the welfare of his subjects.131 Prior to the full divinization
of Rāma, reference is made to kings with elements of the divine,
such as the king having a quarter of Indra in him, or that kings are
gods who walk the earth in the guise of men.132 Yet if divinity is
required for Rāma to protect his prajā, and if the fight against evil
is personified in Rāvaṇa, then the heroic ideal is diminished.
126 2.2.19, 6.105.5–28.
127 F. Whaling, The­Rise­of­the­Religious­Significance­of­Rama, 76ff.
128 Ṛgveda, 7.94.12.
129 S. Pollock, “The Divine King in the Indian Epic”, 505–28; also The­Rāmā-
yaṇa­of­Vālmīki, Vol.­III:­Araṇyakāṇḍa, trans. S. Pollock; see also Mahābhārata,
3.265.28.
130 J.L. Brockington, Righteous Rāma, 218–25.
131 1.61.7ff.
132 2.95.4, 4.18.38.
244 The­Past­Before­Us­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­
Rāvaṇa’s recourse to magic and the supernatural distinguishes
him from Rāma, who functions as a mortal. The counter-hero
often does have these powers which in a sense enhance the glory
of the hero, since he has to combat what is more than human. In
the opening sections of the first book, Rāma is a man of every
virtue. It is only later that the notion of an incarnation of deity is
emphasized.133 Rāma was moving from being an epic hero to be-
coming the exemplar of a post-epic society. In the circumstances,
his decision to accept exile does not arise out of an event, as
for example a game of dice, but from a situation which poses a
moral dilemma where primogeniture is pitted against his father’s
agreement that Kaikeyī’s son would succeed as king. Rāma has
to behave as the exemplar, and this prepares him for the essential
function of the king as protector of dharma.­
A historical change is also being underlined in the association
of kingship with divinity. Rājās were earlier permitted to share
activities with gods but were not gods. The rājā as protector was
initially the heroic figure governed by heroic values. The rājā as
king is also a protector but gradually he becomes the protector of
dharma and can have associations other than mortal. The protector
is now also the nourisher. The last stage in the metamorphosis is
the king who is the incarnation of divinity, an idea which becomes
increasingly frequent in later centuries. It isolates the king from
the normal sources of power, and the king’s divinity becomes
dependent on those who represent the deity on earth.
The change to kingship involved a different manipulation of
power from that of chiefships. The obtaining, maintaining, and
functioning of power was more focused on the king and the
institutions that emerged as the infrastructure of a kingdom and
state. Literature associated with the court as the hub of power
takes on a different character from that associated with the sabhā
or assembly-hall of the chief. But some remnants of the clan so-
ciety do surface. Bharata’s legitimacy in succeeding Daśaratha
was based on the rājyaśulka, an agreement made to Kaikeyī’s
kinsmen at the time of her marriage by which her son would
133 1.14.; see also C. Bulcke, “The Genesis of the Bālakāṇḍa”, 327–31. This
has also been taken to suggest that some parts of the Bālakāṇḍa may be old: The
Rāmāyaṇa­of­Vālmīki, Vol.­I:­Bālakāṇḍa, trans. R.P. Goldman, 67ff.
The Rāmāyaṇa 245
succeed Daśaratha.134 Such an agreement, hinting at bride-price
and an earlier form of polity, may have been unlikely had the
Kekeyas also had a hereditary kingship. The “disqualified eldest”
is a theme in both epics.
Kingship also raises the question of who legitimizes the king.
The idea of his acceptability to the people over whom he rules
gradually gave way to brāhmaṇas being his legitimizers. The king
had to be given the status of a kṣatriya,­or else be content with the
label of vrātya kṣatriya (degenerate kṣatriyas), as were the Yavanas
and Śakas said to have been created by Vasiṣṭha’s magical cow.135
Legitimation was needed where, as in later times, the kṣatriya
status became relatively open, and where those with some power
could consolidate it by resort to fanciful origins and connections.
But it would also have been required in earlier times, in the transi-
tion to kingship, where the aspirant would wish to claim more than
the normal share of power. Thus, when the kṣatra is eating the viś
(as the Vedas put it), this act has to be legitimized.136
Kingship obviously has its own basis of authority, but it can be
buttressed by brahmanical support. In the Mahābhārata, legiti-
macy was acquired through links with the established descent
group—the line of Pūru—even though the heroes are unconnected
by blood, and through the performance of the required sacrificial
rituals, such as the rājasūya. The Rāmāyaṇa points to a significant
shift. The genealogies are brief, the aśvamedha is performed by
Daśaratha and later by Rāma, but essentially Rāma’s qualification
is his conforming to dharma. The notion of rāja-dharma, which
enters both epics through the didactic interventions, readjusts
the meaning of legitimacy. Rāma asserts his authority more often
through his reactions to crises, and his aśvamedha is mentioned
towards the end of the appended narrative.
The aśvamedha he performs is truncated without the presence
of the chief queen, since Sītā is no longer present. There is a vast
audience of a cross-section of people, as well as pauraṇikas, gram-
marians, dancers, and singers. It is the occasion for Kuśa and Lava
to sing the first version of the Rāmāyaṇa­composed by Vālmīki.
134 2.99.3.
135 1.53.18ff., 1.54.3. Such references are clearly late.
136 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 8.7.1.2, 8.7.2.2, 9.4.3.5.
246 The­Past­Before­Us­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­
Notions of dharma seem to be edging out the centrality of yaj-
ñas. Dharma­comes to be defined by the brāhmaṇas and the many
texts on the subject, some with specific rāja-dharma sections,
become the manuals of kingship. Was the Rāmāyaṇa attempting
to be an independent assertion of the king’s dharma before the
interpolations brought it into line with the Dharmaśāstras? The
significance of dharma has also been seen by drawing attention
to the concern with dhamma by the Mauryan king, Aśoka.137 But
Aśoka’s dhamma is not that of the Dharmaśāstras: it is an ethic
that applies universally and assumes social equality. It touches on
the same issues as the rāja-dharma but differs in its understanding
of the functions of the king and the conduct of his subjects.138
Dharma as a legitimizing factor—the king’s actions being in ac-
cordance with a required pattern of governance—introduces a new
feature in the political authority of the king and demarcates him
from the epic hero. It could have released the king from the dictum
of brahmanism, but as it turned out the control over defining the
king’s dharma remained in the hands of the­brāhmaṇas in most
kingdoms. Aśoka endorsing diverse views was not problematic to
many kings, but the people of Kosala, described as dharmaśīla­
(righteous), are praised for not tolerating nāstikas and anṛtakas­
(unbelievers and those opposed to the truth). Who defines the truth
is an implicit question.
The insistence on defining dharma and twinning it with daṇḍa—
the right of the king to punish and coerce—hints at opposition
to the brahmanical definition of dharma, possibly deriving from
nāstika views. The rule of the Mauryas and their patronage of the
śramaṇa sects would have been known to the redactors. The more
effective incorporation of the perception of the past, in historical
terms, is not merely the rājya confronting the gaṇa-saṅgha or
its manifestations but the assumption that the gaṇa-saṅghas or
their like were of the past, and that they would have to give way
to the more recent and more powerful form of state power—the
kingdoms.
The question of what is legitimate becomes an issue, as for ins-
tance in the killing of Vālin. Sugrīva agreed to help Rāma in
137 The­Rāmāyaṇa­of­Vālmīki, Vol.­II:­Ayodhyākāṇḍa, trans. S. Pollock, 69.
138 R. Thapar, Aśoka­and­the­Decline­of­the­Mauryas, 137–81.
The Rāmāyaṇa 247
retrieving Sītā. So Rāma bestows legitimacy on Sugrīva, and in
doing so has to kill the elder brother, Vālin, thus transgressing
primogeniture. Vālin had abducted Sugrīva’s wife. A convoluted
argument is used to justify the killing. It involves the difference
between āryas and anāryas, the fact that monkeys being anāryas
do not observe niyoga (levirate), but that nevertheless Vālin had
sinned—pāpamkarmakṛt—but then he was after all only an animal
(mṛgo hyasi).139 There is much slippage here between different
categories. The essential feature is that both anāryas and mṛgas
have to be subservient. Hanumān’s subservience is later converted
into bhakti.
The new redactions consider the ṛṣis who can, on occasion,
show greater power than the gods. Apsarās­are sent by the gods
to seduce them and weaken the power accumulated by asceticism.
The curse of the ṛṣi can be neutralized, but never erased. This
effectively underlines the claim to moral authority by the ascetic.
In the epic the ascetic is not he who renounces the world and
moves off the pages of history, but rather he who uses the power
of asceticism to direct the unravelling of action. This presents
another facet of the notion of power in human action different
from the obviously political.
Episodes from the Rāmāyaṇa, and more so than even from the
Mahābhārata, became the focus of later compositions in vari-
ous literary forms. From the thirteenth century onwards there
were commentaries on the Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa, such as those of
Varadarāja, Maheśvara, Govindarāja, Nageśa Bhaṭṭa. There is an
awareness in them of contradictions within the text. Some of the
statements are investigated in terms of real time and space. Occa-
sionally, these reflect a concern with the underlying question of
whether the events in the text actually took place. Some attempts
seem to have been made to differentiate between an original text
and additions. Comments are also made on the chronology of
the text. By now it was being said that it was written in the Tretā
yuga, which was of course fantasy, but emphasized an enormous
distance in time. The commentaries are an indication that it had
acquired the status of a hegemonic text.
139 The­Rāmāyaṇa­of­Vālmīki,­Vol.­IV: Kiṣkindhākāṇḍa, trans. R. Lefeber, gen.
ed. R.P. Goldman, 37ff.; Rāmāyaṇa­4.18.19–36.
248 The­Past­Before­Us­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­
The remoulding of the Rāmāyaṇa into a text for the sacred made
it less an epic. Used metaphorically as the personification of good
and evil, it was occasionally applied to historical situations. In the
late first millennium ad, enemy rulers of any category, local and
Turks, were on occasion referred to as Rāvaṇa. The Turks were
not singled out, as has been argued by some scholars.140
5. The Jaina Paumacariyam
The Vālmīki version of the story, significantly different from the
Jātaka, seems to have stimulated yet another version, namely
the Jaina text of Vimalasūri, the Paumacariyam in Prākrit, or the
Padmacarita if referred to by a Sanskrit title. This takes the form
of a counter-epic. Its date, as given by Vimalasūri, is 530 years
after the death of Mahāvīra, which would make it around the
Christian era, but most scholars prefer a slightly later date of the
early centuries ad.141 The Paumacariyam was the earliest among
a long line of Jaina versions, which suggests that the rewriting of
this story was of considerable importance to the Jaina tradition.
If the Vālmīki text was redacted by Vaiṣṇava propagandists, the
Jaina version is equally didactic in using the story to propagate
Jaina views. At the same time, its variants on the story are strik-
ingly significant statements from a historical perspective.
Vimalasūri informs us that he is narrating the traditional story
of Padma/Rāma as told by Mahāvīra to Indrabhūti, who narrated it
to his disciples.142 The initial narrator is either a deity or a person
of status, and this underlines the importance of the text. The story
is also called Rāghavacarita; based on the nāmāvalis and caritas
of Nārāyaṇas and Baladevas available in the Jaina āgamas, it is
sometimes referred to as a purāṇam­ākhyānam.143 The genre re-
mains the same as in the brahmanical tradition but the narratives
and their intentions differ.
140 S. Pollock, “Rāmāyaṇa and Political Imagination in India”, 261–97.
141 Paumacariyam, ed. H. Jacobi, vols I and II; V.M. Kulkarni, The­Story­of­
Rama­in­Jaina­Literature; idem, “Origin and Development of the Rama Story in
Jaina Literature”, 189–204; Pariśiṣṭaparvan, Introduction, xix; K.R. Chandra,
A­Critical­Study­of­Paumacariyam.
142 Paumacariyam, 118.102–3.
143 118.118, 118.111, 1.32, 118.117.
The Rāmāyaṇa 249
Vimalasūri’s purpose in writing his version of the story is, he
says, to give the true facts of what happened instead of the lies and
silly stories, contrary to reason and belief, with which the exist-
ing narrative is replete.144 He does not specifically mention the
Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa, but perhaps it is implied. He proceeds by
going back to the earlier writings which he uses as source, and
whose versions he then questions and conradicts.
His personal background is that he was himself of the Nailakula-
vaṃśa, with no clear affinity to either of the two Jaina sects, the
Digambara or Śvetāmbara. Possibly he was a resident of Mathura,
which features in the story and which was a flourishing Jaina cen-
tre.145 The text in Prākrit was clearly intended for a much wider
audience than if it had been written in Sanskrit.
The Paumacariyam is said to be part of the ācārya-paramparā
(the tradition of teachers), and it would be expected therefore to
incorporate much of what might be called the prehistory of the
Jaina tradition in the form of cosmology, creation legends, and
early mythological material. The book opens with a salutation
to Mahāvīra and the tīrthaṅkaras who are associated with the
teaching of Jainism. In Puranic fashion, it begins with the his-
tory of the universe, the cycles of time, and the biographies of
the tīrthaṅkaras. It is therefore at the intersection of the epic and
Puranic genres. It then proceeds to describe the origin of the major
ruling families involved in the story and gives their genealogies,
some of which are closer to the lists in the Purāṇas than the genea-
logies in the Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa.
The story of Rāma is introduced in a provocative manner. The
initial scene is that of Magadha, a prosperous kingdom located in
Jambudvīpa, with its capital at Rājagṛha and ruled by king Śrenika
(Bimbisāra).146 Śrenika doubts the authenticity of the story as told
in the existing versions and asks for the correct version from a
disciple of Mahāvīra. This is a claim to historicity, Bimbisāra be-
ing a near-contemporary of Mahāvīra. Buddhist sources refer to
Bimbisāra as a contemporary of the Buddha, and he is included
in the Puranic dynastic lists, all of which suggest his historicity.
144 2.116ff.
145 V.M. Kulkarni, The­Story­of­Rama­in­Jaina­Literature, 60.
146 Paumacariyam, 2.1–20.
250 The­Past­Before­Us­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­
Many of Śrenika’s doubts centre around the characterization of
the rākṣasas, and of Rāvaṇa in particular, but he also questions
various other statements.147 The implication of such a beginning
would be that there was some historical basis to the story, but that
the existing versions were deliberate falsifications. The notion of
historicity here is open and central, not embedded. This is not
unconnected with the general attitude towards the past among
Sramanic sects.
What is at issue in the Paumacariyam is not only a Jaina render-
ing of the story but also an attempt to present a sympathetic narra-
tive of “the Other”—the rākṣasas of Vālmīki—if not a narrative
from the perspective of the other side. It is clearly stated that the
rākṣasas are not demons and that the word comes from the root
*rakṣ, meaning “to protect”.148 Rāvaṇa was neither ten-headed—
the Daśagrīva of the Vālmīki version—nor a meat-eating fiend.
All that has been said about him by foolish poets is untrue.149 The
Paumacariyam is a conscious attempt at rewriting the existing
versions of the story and depicting the rākṣasas as they actually
were before being demonized. And it claims historical authenticity
for its version of the story.
The narrative begins with a description of the land of the Vidyā-
dharas— literally, the bearers of knowledge—of whom the rākṣa-
sas and the vānaras form a part. The early chapters provide a
detailed account of the genealogies of these two groups, and it
is not until well into the story that we are introduced to the epi-
sodes involving Daśaratha and Ayodhyā. The geographical
focus is essentially that of the Vindhyan region, with extensions
southwards towards the Godavari river. All the main characters
are pious Jainas, and therefore people who try to avoid violence;
nevertheless, aggressive heroic values cannot be entirely elimi-
nated and the kings and princes in this version do show their valour
in combat.
In the genealogical section, which is technically more efficient
than in the Rāmāyaṇa, it is stated that the four important descent
groups are those of the Ikkhāga/Ikṣvāku, Somavaṃśa, Vijjāharāṇa/
147 3.7ff.
148 5.257.
149 3.14–15.
The Rāmāyaṇa 251
Vidyādhara, and Harivaṃśa.150 The Ikṣvāku is also called the Ādi-
tyay aśa, an alternative name for Sūryavaṃśa, the Solar lineage, of
the Purāṇas.­This was one of the two major lineages as visualized
in the Purāṇas, the other being the Candravaṃśa/Somav aṃśa or
Lunar lineage. The genealogies from the Mahābhārata and the
Rāmāyaṇa, and possibly the early Purāṇas, were doubtless fami-
liar from the oral tradition. It was, however, not so necessary at
this point for the genealogies to tally.
The inclusion of the genealogy was an underlining of claims
to status by birth and connections between clans. Whether it was
accurate beyond a few generations was not of central concern.
The Vidyādhara appears to have been the most important, since
their genealogy is given in greater detail than the others. Even
the etymologies of the names are sometimes included.151 The
Vidyādharavaṃśa traces its ancestry back to the great Ṛṣabha
who, in his later life, became a monk and divided his kingdom
between his two sons, Nami and Vinami. Being the recipients of
many vidyās (sciences and knowledge), they are called Vidyādhara
(bearers of knowledge).
The most important among them is Meghavāhana who, because
of certain complications, has to flee to Laṅkā where he establishes
the Rākṣasavaṃśa.152 Many of the names in the long list seem to
have been arrived at through free association with a multiplicity
of prefixes and suffixes, but all of a similar kind, such as vajra­
(thunderbolt), vidyuta­(lightning), and megha­(cloud), although the
immediate forefathers of the main personalities remain consistent.
Another segment of the Vidyādharavaṃśa important to the story
was the Vānaravaṃśa, which is again founded by a Vidyādhara
prince who is exiled to Vānaradvīpa and where, at Kiṣkindhā, out-
side the Vindhyan region, he establishes a kingdom. The rākṣasas
and the vānaras are therefore related. It is called the Vānaravaṃśa
not because they are monkeys but because the prince takes a
monkey emblem for his standard.153 There are confrontations as
150 5.1–2.
151 5.250ff.
152 5.14ff.; R. Thapar, “The Rāmāyaṇa: Theme and Variation”, in idem, Cul-
tural Pasts,­647–79. The rākṣasas as well as Khāravela, the king of Kaliṅga, both
have a Meghavāhana lineage, and the latter is associated with the Cedis.
153 6.60–92.
252 The­Past­Before­Us­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­
well as marital and political alliances between these segments of
the Vidyādhara line.
The Ādityavaṃśa is also called Ikṣvāku because Ṛṣabha
taught his subjects to process sugarcane. Of its genealogy, only a
few names are common to the Rāmāyaṇa. The Somavaṃśa, the
equivalent of the Candravaṃśa, is not described in detail and
draws less interest. The Harivaṃśa, to which Janaka, the father of
Sītā, belongs, is relatively minor and is not related to the Ikṣvāku -
vaṃśa of Daśaratha. Of the earlier Ikṣvāku kings, the Paumac-
ariyam gives prominence to Sagara, who is said to have married
a Vidyādhara princess.154 This would have been unlikely in the
Vālmīki version.
Rāvaṇa is described as an ardhacakravartin—i.e. an almost uni-
versal monarch, having conquered vast areas of Bhāratavarṣa. He
is also an ardent Jaina and a protector of Jaina shrines. The conflict
between him and Rāma is virtually predetermined since Rāma
is the eighth Vāsudeva and Rāvaṇa is the eighth Prativāsudeva,
the two groups being inherently antagonistic according to Jaina
belief. He is handsome and brave and attractive to the apsarās.
He does not have ten heads but his single head is reflected in each
of the nine large gem-stones which he wears as a necklace, hence
the sobriquet of daśagrīva or Ten-headed.155 He has the ability to
fly and is therefore called akāśamārgi—he who travels through
the sky. Rāvaṇa owns a puṣpakavimāna, an aerial chariot which
he uses on occasion and which endorses his Cedi connection.156
Rāvaṇa is no less a hero than Rāma. His relationship with Sītā
is of a more sensitive kind as compared to the rather terrifying
overtures and threats which he makes in the Vālmīki version.157
The first major exploit of Rāma is the expulsion of the mlec-
cha threatening the kingdom of Janaka,158 an exploit similar to
that of Sagara of earlier times expelling the Haihayas. Daśaratha,
impressed by the teachings of a Jaina muni, decides to renounce
the world. This leads Kaikeyī to demand that her son succeed to
154 5.62ff.
155 7.96.
156 Paumacariyam, 8.1–28.
157 Rāmāyaṇa, 5.20–4.
158 Paumacariyam, 27.4ff.
The Rāmāyaṇa 253
the throne.159 Daśaratha had granted a boon to Kaikeyī because
of her skill in driving his chariot when he was contesting for her
hand. Kaikeyī tries to dissuade Rāma from going into exile, since
she merely wants the succession for her son, and even follows
Rāma into the forest together with Bharata to persuade him to
return, but to no effect.160
The exiles arrive in the Vindhyan region and the conditions of
exile are dissimilar from those described in the Vālmīki version.
Whereas in the latter it was the āśramas of the ṛṣis which had to be
protected, now it is Jaina shrines which replace the āśramas. The
period of exile includes attention to innumerable smaller problems
relating to the royal families of the kingdoms of the Vindhyan
region, which are now scattered in the area earlier described as
wilderness. The araṇya has in parts given way to the grāma, which
in itself would give a later date to this text. Exile here is hardly a
condition of long periods of austerity in the forest. Much time is
spent at local courts and the interweaving by the author of what
purports to be local history.161
In many ways the Paumacariyam is a mirror image of the late
Rāmāyaṇa. This is so not only in its Jaina didactic content, which
has been commented upon by scholars, and which is a counter to
the Vaiṣṇava didacticism of the Vālmīki version, but also in the
thematic structure of the text. The theme of exile occurs at two
levels. One is the familiar narrative of the exile of Rāma, where
the hero lives in the forest for a stipulated period and then returns
home. The other is exile as migration and the settling of new areas,
which is referred to not in connection with the Ikṣvāku line but
with the Vidyādharas.
Meghavāhana establishes himself at Laṅkā and gives rise to the
Rākṣasavaṃśa, and another hero founds the kingdom of Vānara-
dvīpa. The new settlement is demarcated by the term dvīpa, liter-
ally an island, but perhaps used metaphorically in these cases,
as it often was in the geographical sections of the Purāṇas to
denote a distinctive territory. Each had its capital city and some
159 31.59ff.
160 32.38ff.
161 33.25ff., 34.38ff., 36.8ff., 38.22ff., 40.1ff.
254 The­Past­Before­Us­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­
distinguishing topographical feature. Exile is caused by some
conflict with people established in the area, and the rulers of the
new settlement derive their status from kinship connections with
the older lineage.
Unlike the vast wilderness through which the rākṣasas roam
in the Vālmīki text, the territories of the Vidyādharas are more
clearly defined in the Paumacariyam. The kingdoms of the north
tend to be hazy, but there is a greater familiarity with the more
prosperous towns of the northern plains and with the valleys and
plains of Central India. The area of exile in the Vindhyas is no
longer the forest haunt of demons, for it now boasts of some cities
and kingdoms. Inevitably, kingship is as much the norm among
the rākṣasas now as among the Ikṣvākus. Even the institution
of sāmantas (neighbouring rulers and intermediaries) is men-
tioned.162 Marriages are an agency of political alliances, so Rāma,
Lakṣmaṇa, Hanumān, and Rāvaṇa make marriage alliances, or in
some cases consider possibilities.163
Forest peoples such as Pulindas and Bhillas are sometimes re-
ferred to as anārya.164 Other anāryas include the mleccha/milakkha;
these are listed as Śabaras, Kirātas, Kambojas, Śukas, Kapotas, and
suchlike,165 where the main difference was language. The rākṣa-
s­as are depicted as hostile to Vedic sacrifices. This would have
endeared them to the Jainas, who disapproved of the sacrificing
of animals. Another striking difference in the Paumacariyam is
the absence of the need to uphold the varṇāśrama-dharma and
the status of the brāhmaṇa. The brāhmaṇas here are the killers
of animal life in their sacrifices, eaters of meat, indisciplined,
sunk in sensual delights instead of living according to moral laws,
heretics and preachers of false doctrines who have acquired their
status by cheating people.166 The term used for the brāhmaṇas as
heretics—pāṣaṇḍa—is the same that the brāhmaṇas use for the
Sramanic sects.167 Interestingly, the Bhṛgus and the Aṅgirasas and
162 38.51ff.
163 51.12ff., 33.139, 11.100, 19.32, 77.55.
164 98.63, 104.20, 12.13.
165 27.5–8, 27.29–33.
166 4.85ff., 105.46, 11.23–8, 105.43ff.
167 89.48, 4.64–90.
The Rāmāyaṇa 255
their disciples come in for a pointed attack as teachers of silly
doctrines that make fools of people.168 This would suggest that
Vimalasūri’s criticism is particularly aimed at the redacted version
of the Rāmāyaṇa.
The kṣatriyas are also called rayaputta/rājaputra, and their
function is to govern and protect. The protection is extensive and
covers the fending-off of the mlecchas, attacks from the chief
of a tribe, freeing people from an oppressive king, and fighting
rebels.169 The most respected social groups other than royalty
are the merchants, and princes are said on occasion to have been
merchants in their previous births.170 This is not surprising, given
that the Jaina saṅgha had many Jaina merchant families as its
patrons.
The greatest reverence is naturally given to the Jaina munis
who weave their way through the narrative. Although there is no
well-defined theory of incarnation, as in Vaiṣṇava Bhāgavatism,
the tripartite complex of Vāsudeva–Prativāsudeva–Baladeva
serves a similar function. The inevitability therefore of the prede-
termined relationship between Rāma and Rāvaṇa erodes some of
the brutality of the conflict and reduces thereby the occasions for
heroic stances. The Jaina muni is frequently found to be preach-
ing renunciation. Finally, both Daśaratha and Rāma renounce the
world and Sītā becomes a nun, the Jaina ethic triumphing over
the kṣatriya ethic.
The vehemence with which the Paumacariyam denounces the
known versions of the Rāmāyaṇa and sets out to give a differ-
ent version does suggest that, apart from the existence of alter-
native versions, there may have been a historical need for such
a treatment. The Paumacariyam may well have been attempt-
ing to legitimize the Vidyādhara lineage. It could be acting
as a charter of validation for the kingdoms which arose in the
Vindhyan region and its fringes in the early Christian era. These
were the Traikūṭaka in western India, rising on the decline of the
Sātavāhana and the Ābhira; the Bodhi in Bundelkhand and Tripuri,
which area later saw the rise of the Kalacūri; the Bhoja and the
168 4.86.
169 3.115, 27.28ff., 34.44, 33.115ff., 26.29.
170 5.81–92.
256 The­Past­Before­Us­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­
Vākāṭaka in Vidarbha; Dakṣina Kosala under various rulers; and
the Cedi in Kaliṅga. Linking many of these was what appears to
be a Cedi connection, with some among them using the Cedi era
of ad 248–9 in their records.171
Jainism was becoming more popular in this region during the
early centuries ad and was doubtless seeking royal patronage.
Many dynasties were beginning to seek genealogical links with
the more established kṣatriya lineages. Those claiming Haihaya
origins may have encouraged the questioning of the Bhārgava
versions of the tradition.172 The Jaina version may well have been
more acceptable if the dynasties which claimed Cedi and Megha-
vāhana connections were claiming a radically different identity
for the rākṣasas.
The Jaina background to the Paumacariyam would not be averse
to Cedi connections. In suggesting that Śrenika was conversing
with Jaina teachers, Vimalasūri was projecting a Jaina association
with Magadha to an earlier period. The Mahābhārata endorses a
link between the Cedis and Magadha. Among early royal patrons,
the Jainas claim Candragupta Maurya, during whose reign their
focus was on Magadha. That the Kaliṅga Cedis were patrons of
the Jainas is stated in their inscriptions. At about the same time,
Mathura emerged as a centre of Jaina worship.173 By the early cen-
turies ad, Vidiśā had Jaina centres and gradually such centres were
established in Bundelkhand and Rewa as well.174 The Jaina context
of the Paumacariyam therefore was familiar in North India.
Surprisingly, little attention is given to the real time of these
historical events that are associated with Jaina activity. The con-
cept of time remains close to that of the cyclic yugas. It points to
a familiarity with the concepts of the epics and the Purāṇas,­but
there are differences. Time is divided into kalpas—the longest
171 V.V. Mirashi (ed.), Corpus­Inscriptionum­Indicarum, IV.1.1ff.
172 F.E. Pargiter, Ancient­Indian­Historical­Tradition, 197ff.
173 G. Buhler, “New Jaina Inscriptions from Mathura”, 371ff., 393ff.; idem,
“Further Jaina Inscriptions from Mathura”, 195ff.; V.S. Agrawala, “Catalogue
of the Mathura Museum . . .”, 36ff.
174 K.D. Bajpai, “Development of Jaina Art in Madhya Pradesh”; U.P. Shah,
Jaina­Art­and­Architecture, vol. I, 128; V.V. Mirashi, Corpus­Inscriptionum­
Indicarum, IV, clxi–ii.
The Rāmāyaṇa 257
unit—and each of these is conceived as a cycle with an up-
swing (utsarpini), which leads to prosperity, and a downswing
(avasarpini), which moves towards a decline. The analogy is to
the waxing and waning of the moon.175 The length of the kalpa
is 20 koṭakoṭisagara years, where 1 sagara equals 10 koṭakoṭi­
palyopama years and 1 palyopama is the time taken to empty
an area 1 yojana­wide and deep-filled with the hair of new-born
children, and where 1 hair is removed annually.176 Each half-cycle
is divided into 6 periods of time, the duration of which changes
in the ratio of 4, 3, 2, 1 koṭakoṭisagara years, and each of the last
two are 21,000 years. Once again, the immensity of measurements
tends to annul time.
Utopian conditions existed in the remote past when wish-fulfill-
ing trees provided for all wants.177 The decline in the downswing
brought about the need to labour, and also the introduction of
caste as varṇa and jāti.178 These are listed as kṣatriyas, vaiśyas, and
śūdras. Mention is also made of purohitas and bhaṭṭas. Time there-
fore is virtually infinite, and the decline from utopian beginnings
makes it necessary to have law-givers.179 The scheme recognizes
change over time and tries to rationalize the need for law and the
functionaries of law-giving, such as, presumably, the king.
6. The Rāma-kathā as Part of a
Historical Tradition
It would seem possible to argue that the epic literature is describing
the bifurcation of chiefdoms and kingdoms and the gradual fading
away of the first with the establishing of the second. Pāṇini is aware
of the two systems when he says that ruling kṣatriyas were either
ekarāja or ekādhīna, or else they were gaṇādhīna­or ruled by a
saṅgha. The saṅgha was a corporate body without distinctions of
high and low. The intention in the epics, apart from other concerns,
is to evoke the earlier societies whose form in some places was
175 3.49ff.
176 20.63ff. One yojana can be anywhere between 2.5 and 9 miles.
177 3.37ff., 102.126–32.
178 3.111ff.
179 K.R. Chandra, A­Critical­Study­of­Paumacariyam, 316.
258 The­Past­Before­Us­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­
still current, and to record the historical change to more recent
forms; as also to claim legitimacy for the change.
The further proliferation of the story in variant forms and
languages was linked with both the spread of Vaiṣṇavism and
processes of cultural assimilation. But it served other purposes
as well. The Gupta and post-Gupta period saw the subjugation of
forest tribes by various kingdoms, where the latter either extended
their territory or tried to intensify their control over all areas of the
existing kingdom, including those inhabited by forest-dwellers.180
The conflict between Kosala and the rākṣasas doubtless was seen,
even subconsciously, as a metaphor and justification of encroach-
ment into forests. The texts would therefore be topical, and provide
a validation from the past for such encroachments.
Another feature is connected to the genealogical links claimed
by many new dynasties at this time. Rituals such as the rājasūya,­
aśvamedha, or vājapeya, which were once the only legitimation
ceremonies, began to be superseded by genealogical connec-
tions. This led to brāhmaṇas gradually taking over custodian-
ship of the genealogical data from which they could provide the
necessary links for their patrons among the ruling families. The
vaṃśānucarita section of some early Purāṇas, listing descent and
succession of clans and then dynasties, were constructed to go back
to the earliest origins.181 Two lineages, as noted earlier, dominate
the pattern: the Sūryavaṃśa/Solar lineage, and the Candravaṃśa/
Lunar lineage. Rāma, his ancestors and descendants, belonged to
the Sūryavaṃśa, whereas the clans of the Mahābhārata were in
the main members of the Candravaṃśa. Thus, all those dynasties
which claimed descent from the Solar line would also claim Rāma
as their ancestor, and the genealogical link was made through one
of his two sons, Kuśa or Lava. The story of Rāma would there-
fore become the ancestral epic. That Rāma was an incarnation of
Viṣṇu strengthened the notion of kings being associated with the
divine.
Courtly culture involved heroic actions similar to those in the
180 As for example in the Allahabad pillar inscription associated with Samu-
dra gupta, and the later Khoh plates of Hastin: J.F. Fleet (ed.), Corpus­Inscrip-
tionum­Indicarum, vol. III, 1ff., 93ff.
181 See Chapter Six.
The Rāmāyaṇa 259
epic and also encouraged loyalty and devotion to the king. He was
not only a terrestrial ruler, he also had elements of the divine and
an impeccable ancestry and occasionally was an incarnation of
deity. Loyalty and devotion to the king constituted a useful norm,
to be inculcated among the many intermediaries—the sāmantas.
These formed the nobility, where the term sāmanta was ceasing
to mean a neighbour and was used more frequently for a subor-
dinate ruler.
The epic is a saga of heroes and focuses on chiefships in com-
petition over territory, status, and rights, although the ostensible
reason in the narrative may be the kidnapping of the heroine or
the losing of a game of dice. The reformulation of the story may
happen on occasions of major historical change, such as with the
emergence of the state in the form of a kingdom, or of new states
with fresh incentives, or when states require ideologies that mark
out the king as having divine elements. Such changes required
validation from the past, and the story was recast to provide this.
New territory may be incorporated into the geographical circum-
ference of epic events, where such territory has to be described as
having been rightfully settled or conquered. The legitimacy of the
new rulers has to be ensured through origin myths, genealogical
links, and events held to be significant to the tradition. Mythology
is used to draw the territory and the personalities into a circle of
known and familiar forms. Kingship is used to establish links
between the new rulers and the territory which is to be incorpo-
rated. The ideological-religious background is provided by those
religions—Buddhism, Bhāgavatism, and Jainism—whose spread
coincides with the power of kingdoms, each with its court, capital,
and ability to bestow royal patronage.
If a kernel of historicity is sought in the Rāmāyaṇa, it may lie
in the references commonly made in the Jātakas,­the­Mahābhārata,
and later the Purāṇas, to conflict among the clans. Clans descended
from Yadu are associated with attacks on Ayodhyā. These are
the Andhavenhu/Andhakavṛṣṇis and the Haihayas, who are not
associated with kingdoms but with gaṇas (chiefships), and are
said to be dāsaputtas—a low status.182 In the Mahābhārata there
182 Ghaṭa­Jātaka, no. 454; Kumbha­Jātaka, no. 511, in The Jātaka.
260 The­Past­Before­Us­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­
is a confrontation between the Vṛṣṇis and the Cedis, expressed
through the animosity of Kṛṣṇa towards Jarāsandha and Śiśupāla,
located in the middle Ganges plain. But the Vṛṣṇis are absent in
the Rāmāyaṇa. Rāvaṇa, being of Meghavāhana descent according
to the Paumacariyam, may have been a Cedi. The Cedis, also of
Yadu descent, have a high status in Buddhist sources and claim
the primeval ruler, Mahāsammata, as their ancestor. Rāvaṇa be-
ing airborne is reminiscent of the Cedi chief Vasu having been
given an aerial chariot by Indra. According to Puranic accounts
the Haihayas, associated with the Cedis, who were in turn linked
to Meghavāhana, attacked Ayodhyā and were eventually defeated
by Sagara.183 The Rāmāyaṇa refers to the Haihayas and other clans
attacking Ayodhyā.184 The Bhṛgus are said to have been priests to
the Haihayas but to have left them after an altercation.
Interestingly, in the transition from lineage-based societies to
states, it is Magadha and Kosala which emerge among the earlier
states that move towards kingdoms.185 In the first century bc,
Khāravela, the Jaina king of Kaliṅga, claims a Cedi origin and a
Meghavāhana lineage.186 Kaliṅga is the territory earlier conquered
by the Nandas and the Mauryas. Did the establishment of mon-
archy in the middle Ganges plain treat the alternative existing
chiefdoms initially with animosity, until such time as they too
mutated into kingdoms, or were absorbed into larger states?
The identifications suggested here hinge on the Paumacari-
yam describing Rāvaṇa as a Vidyādhara of the Meghavāhana
lineage. The historical link is provided by the inscription of
Khāravela, where he claims Cedi links and descent from Vasu,
and a Meghavāhana lineage. Given the historical evidence, the
Cedis by the early centuries ad were distributed along the south-
ern Vindhyas and Central India from the west coast to the east.
Most scholars argue for the location of Laṅkā in the Vindhyan
or Amarakantaka or the Mahanadi region, which would not be
a problem. The epic therefore would not be concerned with the
183 F.E. Pargiter, Ancient Indian­Historical­Tradition, 153; Rāmāyaṇa, 1.37–40,
2.102.14.
184 2.102.14.
185 R. Thapar, From­Lineage­to­State, 110ff.
186 Hathigumpha Inscription, Ep. Ind.,­20, 71–89.
The Rāmāyaṇa 261
historicity of Rāma but with representing the more important
event, namely, the confrontation between the clans where the
descendants of Ikṣvāku were trying to get their own back on the
raid of the Yadu clans. The demonizing of the Cedis into rakṣasas
was partly poetic imagery, and partly the politics of the conflict
with the Cedis, with the delineation of the rakṣasas drawing in
part on the alien culture of the forest-dwellers. The descriptions
of the two are similar.
From this perspective, the Paumacariyam depicts the estab-
lishment of kingship in those very areas where previously there
had been chiefships, or at most early forms of kingship. The
three versions of the narrative refer to three different historical
moments; and the latter two are well aware of a distance in time
and the reconstruction of the past. They register a historical state-
ment of change in the area. There is a much sharper and stronger
assertion of identity and a different identity among the rākṣasas
in the Paumacariyam than in the earlier two. In the Jātakas they
are demons, goblins, and magical beings, and their role tends to
be minimal. The Vālmīki text depicts them as similar to human
society in some ways but as lurid creatures of the imagination.
The Paumacariyam has no doubt about their being a recogniz-
able human group with rights over a specific geographical area,
governed by the institutions of kingship. The conflict in this
version is one between equals. The revelation of this identity in
all its facets would have required a rewriting of the story to in-
corporate the changes. The rewriting coincides with the period
when such changes were taking place either in areas of erstwhile
gaṇa-saṅghas, or some previously forested areas.
The literary construction of a given reality may not be historical
fact, but it offers insights into that reality. The importance of cul-
tural survivals in some societies are not pristine and unchanged in
form because survivals accumulate and internalize contemporary
events. They also point to historical implications in the nature of
the changes they undergo. Variants illumine each other and the
modern historian has to be cautious in accepting any single one as
central for all time. The dialogue may not refer to the totality of
the text. Fragments may be more pointed in terms of making new
statements. Variants are essentially in dialogue with each other,
262 The­Past­Before­Us­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­
and since the dialogue extends over time it includes elements of
perspectives on the past and constructions of the past. The new
has greater acceptability if it is seen as a transformation of the
old, although in fact it may be making a statement which is a de-
parture from the old. Each change reflects the politics of culture,
for these versions were meant for popular audiences and also had
a political function which included the legitimation of monarchy,
religious sectarianism, and dissenting heterodoxy.
In the variants discussed above a major innovation is the
notion of historicity. The Vālmīki text and the Buddhist stories
make no mention of this, although they may intend it. The first
text to claim historicity is the Jaina version. It insists on this not
only by associating the text with the historical king Śrenika/
Bimbisāra, but by denouncing the other versions as fabrications.
The Jaina variant alone is attempting to present what it claims is
an authentic historical account; therefore the endorsements which
it suggests are significant from the point of view of a perspective
on the past. The claim of historicity for this story connotes a new
concern with the past.
PART III
Interlude: The Emerging
Historical Tradition

6
Genealogies in the Making of
a Historical Tradition
The Vaṃśānucarita of the
Viṣṇu Purāṇa
1 The Context of the Purāṇas
The Purāṇas, partially incorporating historical traditions,
are texts on the threshold, as it were, of the recognizable
genesis of one kind of historical writing in early India—the
itihāsa-purāṇa tradition. In their lists of succession, the vaṃśānu­
caritas—which form one section of these texts—cull their data
from the embedded narratives in the Vedas and the epics, which
they use as sources. These succession lists, although again em-
bedded in religious sectarian texts, can nevertheless also be
seen—which they often were later—as statements independent of
the texts in which they had been placed.1 The data in them is
reformulated in accordance with what was more appropriate to
contemporary social forms, a change due in part to recognizing
the political and social potential of creating a historical tradition.
1 R. Thapar, “The Purāṇas: Heresy and the Vaṃśānucarita”, 28–48; idem,
“Genealogical Patterns as Perceptions of the Past”, in idem, Cultural Pasts, 710–
53; idem, “Clan, Caste and Origin Myths in Early India”, in ibid., 782–96.
266 The Past Before Us
It probably also arose from observing the actual usefulness of
reconstructions of history, as had become evident from the Bud-
dhist perspective.
The Purāṇas mark a new phase in the making of a historical
tradition. Purāṇa being literally “that which is ancient”, these texts
claim links to the past. Their historical concern, in the shape of
their succession lists—seek to provide a continuous genealogical
construct of lineages, followed by dynasties of rulers from earliest
times to approximately the mid-first millennium ad. The historical
past emerges through these lists.
The Purāṇas took shape as a distinctive genre in the first mil-
lennium ad, some composed in the early part of the millennium
and some later. The material incorporated may, once again, have
existed originally as part of an oral tradition. Each section of the
text has a distinct theme with a discernible pattern. Some segments
occur in other texts as well, such as discussions on kingship and
on concepts of time. Intertextuality between the Purāṇas becomes
important.2 They claim to evolve from the Vedas, a connection
claimed largely to ensure status. They reflect much that is marginal
to the Vedas, and some that comes from the non-Vedic, although
the latter is not conceded. Incorporation was one mechanism of
overcoming the influence of the other. The teaching of the śrama­
ṇas is regarded as evil. Nevertheless, the antagonism suggests
that the reformulation of historical data was in part motivated by
the historical traditions propagated by Sramanic ideas. There can
therefore be contradictions in the Puranic discourse. That the old
can become the new encapsulates the notion of change.3 The early
narratives were intended to construct an image of the past.4
Each Purāṇa focused on a deity and became a compen-
dium of its worship, subject to interpolations.5 The Viṣṇu, Vāyu,
Brahmāṇḍa, Matsya, and Bhāgvata Purāṇas included genealogies
2 G. Bailey, “Intertextuality in the Purāṇas: A Neglected Element in the Study
of Sanskrit Literature”, 179–98.
3 Nirukta of Yāska, 3.19: pura navam bhavati iti purāṇam.
4 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 11.5.6.8: puravṛtta pratipādikam purāṇam.
5 R.C. Hazra, Studies in the Puranic Records of Hindu Rites and Customs;
L. Rocher, The Puranas.
Genealogies in the Making of a Historical Tradition 267
of ancient heroes and king-lists of early dynasties. Concepts of
time, which have a bearing on the notion of history and in cons-
tructing chronologies, were also described.
Initial studies of the Purāṇas in the late eighteenth and nine-
teenth centuries took them to be second-order knowledge, as
compared to the Vedas, in accordance with brahmanical views.
William Jones compared their chronologies with Biblical ones
and the dynastic lists with data from non-Indian sources, but he
made few connections. For purposes of history the focus was on
the vaṃśānucarita, set of course in the wider context of the other
contents of the genre.
Attempts at establishing an order in the genealogies were made
by H.H. Wilson in the nineteenth century and by F.E. Pargiter
almost a century ago.6 Wilson was frustrated by the questionable
authenticity of the Purāṇas, yet had to concede that they were a
basic source of early history. Pargiter was less interested in the
genealogical patterns and what these may be stating, and more
in trying to identify the different descent groups. This was easier
for the third part, dealing with dynasties, since quite a few could
be correlated with other categories of sources. Pargiter’s plea that
the data be treated seriously was well taken; unfortunately his
identifications of the descent groups were misleading.
Defending the Purāṇas as historical records, Pargiter argued
that even as part of the oral tradition some memory of early kings
would have remained and that, however garbled the genea lo-
gies, they would still have been based initially on some authentic
versions. This provided the Purāṇas with a degree of respectabi-
lity in the eyes of modern historians; nevertheless, the debate
remained heated.7 Pargiter’s readings became unacceptable as he
argued, on the basis of current theories, that Indian history began
with the Aryans, and that the genealogies recorded the story of
Aryan expansion.8 By this argument some lineages were of the
6 Śrīviṣṇupurāṇa; The Vishnu Purana, ed. and trans. H.H. Wilson; idem,
“Analysis of the Puranas”, 61ff.; F.E. Pargiter, Ancient Indian Historical Tradition;
idem, The Purana Text of the Dynasties of the Kali Age (hereafter DKA).
7 U.N. Ghoshal, Studies in Indian History and Culture, 37–52.
8 F.E. Pargiter, Ancient Indian Historical Tradition, 295–6, 306, 311–12.
268 The Past Before Us
Aryan race, some Dravidian, and some of the Austro-Asiatic
groups. This was at a time when the notion of such “races” was
acceptable to historians.
Whether or not Puranic genealogies should be taken seriously
as historical material remains controversial. Some have stated
that “to extract either chronology or history from such data, must
be an operation attended with equal success as the extraction of
sunbeams from cucumbers by the sages of Laputa.”9 Vincent
Smith, on the other hand, spoke of their dynastic lists as a “near
approach to accuracy”, particularly in relation to the Andhra kings,
although other historians have been more sceptical.10
Historians of the later twentieth century have attempted to put
together a narrative of history from these genealogies. Pusalker
in the 1950s also treated the data as mapping the spread of the
Aryans, despite the fact that none of the groups listed is specifi-
cally described as “ārya”.11 Pradhan, Bhargava, and Morton-Smith
attempt ed to work out definitive chronologies, calculating time
periods on the basis of what is said about chronology and on the gene-
rational length.12 But this was arbitrary because of variations in the
lists and there being few close correlations with other sources.
These readings have hinged on a literal understanding of history
as a chronicle of rulers and the genealogies get treated as factual,
whereas it might be more useful to understand why genealogies,
factual or not, came to play such a central role in the perception of
the past. The unsuccessful attempts to cull what may be regarded
9 V. Kennedy, Researches into the Nature and Affinity of Ancient and Hindu
Mythology, 130.
10 V. Smith, “Andhra History and Coinage”, 649–75; idem, The Early History
of India, 11–12; H.C. Raychaudhuri, Political History of Ancient India, uses the
Puranic lists for reconstructing early history, particularly dynastic history. For
a sceptical view of history in these sources, see D.D. Kosambi, Ancient India:
A History of its Culture and Civilisation, 174.
11 A.D. Pusalker (ed.), History and Culture of the Indian People, Vol. I: The
Vedic Age, 271–322.
12 S.N. Pradhan, Chronology of Ancient India; P.L. Bhargava, India in the
Vedic Age; A.D. Pusalker, Studies in the Epics and Puranas; idem, History and
Culture of the Indian People, Vol. I: The Vedic Age; R. Morton-Smith, Dates and
Dynasties in Earliest India; M.N. Yajnik, Genealogical Tables of the Solar and
Lunar Dynasties.
Genealogies in the Making of a Historical Tradition 269
as reliable history from the Purāṇas has underlined the need to
look at the Puranic sources from a different perspective. Evidently,
the genealogies were not invariably meant to be taken literally.
Chronologies of Indian history, and the more linear concepts
of time, begin with genealogies, as also with records in the form
of inscriptions. But the veracity of the vaṃśānucarita cannot be
assumed, except perhaps in patches. The argument has been that
since dynasties of the third section are largely historically attested,
the earlier genealogies should also be taken literally.
Generational length in India has been computed as averaging
fourteen or even twenty-seven years.13 Reign lengths vary accord-
ing to the stability of the polity, and stable dates tend to support
longer reigns—as has been suggested in studies of genealogical
data from elsewhere.14 Uninterrupted direct descent from father
to son among dynasties rarely exceeds five or six reigns.15 The
Puranic lists were not meant to be treated as chronologically pre-
cise, although time is important to genealogical reconstructions,
however approximate. The kṣatriya descent lists are dated to the
Dvāpara yuga and the dynastic lists to the succeeding Kaliyuga,
the point of change being approximately the battle at Kurukṣetra
in or just after most Purāṇas.
2. The Purāṇas
The format of the Purāṇa, ideally, was that it should consist of
the pañca­lakṣana or “the five facets” which set it apart from
other literature. These were the descriptions of the sarga (primary
creation), prati­sarga (secondary creation), manvantara (the time
cycles), vaṃśa (succession, in this instance, largely of deities and
sages), and the vaṃśānucarita. The last is regarded as an important
component of the ideal Purāṇa, although it is not common to all.16
13 T. Trautmann, “Length of Generation and Reign in Ancient India”, 564–77;
A.L. Basham, Studies in Indian History and Culture.
14 D.H. Jones, “Problems of African Chronology”, 161–76.
15 D.P. Henige, The Chronology of Oral Tradition, 120.
16 R.C. Hazra, Studies in the Puranic Records of Hindu Rites and Customs, 4–5;
idem, Studies in the Upa­Puranas; L. Rocher, The Puranas, 115–32; S.H. Levitt,
“A Note on the Compound Pañcalakṣaṇa in Amarasiṅha’s Nāmalingānuśasana”,
5–38.
270 The Past Before Us
In fact, only one, the Viṣṇu Purāṇa, conforms to the format of the
five. Sometimes there is even mention of ten facets, but these are
less evident in the texts.17
Each Purāṇa focuses on a deity and its worship. Apart from
myths, this includes rules relating to gift-giving, fasts, pilgrim-
ages, rituals, and sectarian religious data. The older Purāṇas
are the Matsya, Vāyu, Viṣṇu, and Brahmāṇḍa,18 and these have
much in common. The Bhaviṣya claims to narrate the dynasties
of the future,19 but the title “Bhaviṣya Purāṇa” is something of an
oxymoron.
There is a difference between the eighteen mahāpurāṇas and
the lesser ones which, in a later period, came to include a wide
variety of subsidiary texts, such as the Upa­Purāṇas, often focus-
ing on lesser deities. Associated with these were texts on sacred
topography and places of pilgrimage, such as the Sthala­Purāṇas
and the Mahātmyas, incorporating the believed history of the sites.
Still later, the caste Purāṇas—as for example those of the Mallas,
the Śrimālas, and the Dharmāranyas—provided glimpses of the
past arising out of social concerns. Of the non-brahmanical sects,
the Jainas produced their Purāṇas, presenting a different perspect-
ive from the brahmanical.
Hinduism, as reflected in the Purāṇas, has come to be called
Puranic Hinduism to differentiate it from Vedic Brahmanism. The
prominence of deities such as Viṣṇu and Śiva, earlier marginal,
is new, as is the depiction of deities as icons housed in temples,
and the act of worship being an offering to the icon accompanied
by hymns and prayers in the commonly spoken languages. The
later Purāṇas gave more space to religious sects: for example, the
Samba Purāṇa to the cult of the Magas, or those of erstwhile tribal
areas, such as that of Vindhyavāsinī (Central India). However, my
17 Bhāgavata Purāṇa, 2.10.1ff. All citations, unless otherwise specified, are
to the edition by V.L. Pansikar.
18 R.C. Hazra, Studies in the Puranic Records of Hindu Rites and Customs,
8 ff.; Matsya Purāṇa, ed. H.N. Apte; V.S. Agrawala, Matsya Purana: A Study;
S.G. Kantawala, Cultural History from the Matsya Purana; Vāyu Purāṇa, ed.
R. Mitra; V.R.R. Dikshitar, Some Aspects of the Vāyu Purāṇa; Brahmāṇḍa
Purāṇa, ed. K. Srikrishnadas.
19 F.E. Pargiter, DKA, viiff.
Genealogies in the Making of a Historical Tradition 271
concern is only with the vaṃśānucarita section, and specifically
the one in the Viṣṇu Purāṇa.
3. The Authors
The Purāṇas claim an ancient ancestry.20 Brahmā is said to have
compiled them even before the Vedas were revealed.21 Revelation
emphasizes a different origin, and compilation facilitated each
Purāṇa becoming a sectarian text. A Vedic link is suggested in
the earlier statement that the itihāsa-purāṇa was the fifth Veda.
The beginnings of the Purāṇas seem to have been diverse, with
various groups elbowing in. The transmission of the Purāṇa went
from Brahmā via the sages to Parāśara, the grandson of Vasiṣṭha.22
Initially, the sūta (bard) narrates that Maitreya asked Parāśara
to explain to him the origin of the universe and all that followed.
Other Purāṇas maintain that they were recited by the sūta to the
ṛṣis in the Naimiśa forest—thus imitating the Mahābhārata.
Elsewhere, we are told that Veda Vyāsa, having edited the earl-
ier Vedic material and authored the Mahābhārata, subsequently
gathered together the itihāsa­purāṇa and compiled the original
Purāṇa.23 The possibility of an ur-text has not been accepted by
most scholars, who hold that there has always been a diversity
of Purāṇas. Associating them with Vyāsa gave them a higher
status.
There is a parallel between some forms in the Purāṇas and
the Mahābhārata. A sūta arrives in the forest. Here, a sacrifice
is being performed, and he is asked to recite the story of former
times—purāṇam. The Purāṇas drew on the narratives of earlier
rājās from the Vedic texts, although often with some change.24
Whether they were intended as commentaries remains contro-
versial.25 There are references in the Viṣṇu Purāṇa to the use of
20 Vāyu Purāṇa, 1.183; Matsya Purāṇa, 53.63.
21 Vāyu Purāṇa, 1.54.
22 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 1.2.8–9. This and all future citations are to the Gorakhpur
edition.
23 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 3.6.15ff.
24 P. Horsch, Die Vedische Gāthā und Śloka Literateur, 12–13.
25 L. Rocher, The Puranas, 14ff.
272 The Past Before Us
earlier forms, such as the ākhyāna, upākhyāna, gāthā, and others,
as sources.26
The earlier Purāṇas are the more important ones in terms of
genealogical data, although the details vary. Genealogies were en-
larged from the shallow lists of the Vedic corpus to the longer ones
of the epics, and thence to further generations, interspersed with
familiar legends.27 Contradictory statements suggest that these
texts do not conform to a particular orthodoxy. Some claim that the
Purāṇas are the sāra (essence) of the Vedas, others that they pre-
cede the Vedas—purāṇam sarva śāstrānām pratham.28 Additions
are claimed as that which came from the past (yathāśruta).29
The Viṣṇu Purāṇa has more on the Mauryan dynasty (fourth to
second centuries bc), the Matsya on the Andhras (second to third
centuries ad), and the Vāyu attempts to bring the dynastic lists up
to the Guptas (fourth to sixth centuries ad).30 Because they were
not regarded as revealed, they could be changed and brought up-
to-date with contemporary social needs, which makes it difficult to
date them. Their claim to authenticity is that their contents come
from ancient times.31
The Viṣṇu Purāṇa states that for compiling the four Vedas
Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana consulted one brāhmaṇa for each. But for the
itihāsa-purāṇa he asked the sūta Romaharṣaṇa. This was despite
the itihāsa-purāṇa being referred to as the fifth Veda.32 This sug-
gests that the source of the Purāṇas lay in the compositions of the
sūtas, even if the recital is attributed to a brāhmaṇa.
In attributing the composition of the Purāṇas to Vyāsa and
various brāhmaṇas, there is interplay between the sūtas and the
brāhmaṇas, both linked with the authorship. If the genealogical
sections were originally composed in Prākrit, as has been sug-
gested, they are more likely to have been composed by the sūtas.33
26 A.S. Gupta, “Purāṇa, Itihāsa and Ākhyāna”, 451ff.; Viṣṇu Purāṇa,
3.6.15ff.
27 Mahābhārata, 4.20.8ff., 1.69.29ff.; Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 4.1.11ff.
28 Devī­Bhāgavata Purāṇa, 12.13.26; Matsya Purāṇa, 53.3.
29 Padma Purāṇa, 5.2.53.
30 V. Smith, The Early History of India, 11ff.
31 Vāyu Purāṇa, 1.183; Matsya Purāṇa, 53.63.
32 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 3.4.7–10; 3.6.15ff.
33 F.E. Pargiter, DKA, x–xi.
Genealogies in the Making of a Historical Tradition 273
On brāhmaṇas recognizing the importance of appropriating the
records of the past, they may have taken these over, rendered
them into Sanskrit, and incorporated them in the early Purāṇas.
Such a process would point to the recognition of the importance
of creating a historical tradition. The information is generally
given in the form of a dialogue, with one person asking a ques-
tion and the other replying, as with Maitreya and Parāśara in the
Viṣṇu Purāṇa.
Echoing the Mahābhārata, it is also said that an original Purāṇa
was taught by Vyāsa to his fifth disciple, the bard Lomaharṣaṇa/
Romaharṣaṇa—literally “causing the hair to stand erect in excite-
ment”—who was not a brāhmaṇa.34 He is praised and respected
and requested to narrate past events.35 The connection of the
purāṇa with the sūta would seem to be so necessary that, even
when it is attributed to brāhmaṇa authors, the sūta remains central.
Lomaharṣaṇa divided the original Purāṇa into six parts, each of
which he taught to all his six disciples. These six, curiously, were
all brāhmaṇas, curious because the high-caste brāhmaṇa would
not have taken instruction from the lower-caste bard. In addition,
Lomaharṣaṇa also taught the entire Purāṇa to his son, Ugraśravas,
who recited it for a living, his disciples being brāhmaṇas and
bards. Clearly, there is ambivalence over whether the authorship be
ascribed to brāhmaṇas or to bards, and this is also an echo from the
Mahābhārata. Doubtless, this was aggravated by the genealogical
material coming from the oral tradition of the bards. Most exist-
ing Purāṇas claim the stereotyped origin that they were revealed
by a deity to a ṛṣi, who then recited the text at a sacrifice.36 Many
of the early Purāṇas suggest that they were first recited in some
part of northern India, sometimes the Naimiśa forest, but this was
probably just convention.37
The sūta is said to have been honoured by the sages, even
34 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 3.4.10, 3.6.15ff.; Vāyu Purāṇa, 1.1.13–33; Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa,
2.35.63ff.; V.S. Agrawala, “Original Purāṇa Saṃhita”, Purāṇa, 232–45. The
caste status of Vyāsa remains somewhat ambiguous. See B.M. Sullivan, Krishna
Dvaipayana Vyasa and the Mahabharata: A New Interpretation.
35 Vāyu Purāṇa, 1.13–33.
36 G. Bonazzoli, “Puranic Parampara”, 33–60.
37 G. Bonazzoli, “Places of Puranic Recitation According to the Purāṇas”,
48–60.
274 The Past Before Us
though he is not entitled to knowledge of the Vedas or to recite
them.38 Status in this case seems to have been different from caste,
since it is said on one occasion that the killing of a sūta was as
heinous as killing a brāhmaṇa: and yet the same text refers to the
bard as being of low caste.39
The other term for a bard used occasionally is māgadha, even
more obscure etymologically, perhaps linked to Magadha in south
Bihar. The māgadha is sometimes called brahmabandhu, suggest-
ing a dubious brahmanical link. Could this be a hint of these being
low-level priests whose importance depended on their knowledge
of the oral tradition?
The Manu Dharmaśāstra ascribes a low status to the sūta and
the māgadha owing to their being of mixed caste (varṇasaṃkara),
with a kṣatriya father and a brāhmaṇa mother, and therefore born
of a hypogamous union (pratiloma), regarded as particularly low.40
Did the lowering of status reflect the bardic tradition having been
taken over by the brāhmaṇas? The Arthaśāstra, however, distin-
guishes between the ordinary sūta and the one who recites the
Purāṇas, but the māgadha remains low. In a largely oral tradi-
tion, it would seem normal for there to have been large numbers
of persons associated with the profession of reciting narratives
and compositions of various kinds, such as the gāthaka and the
gāyanah, both of whom were singers;41 the kuśīlavah and the
vāgajīvana.42
The origin of the sūta and the māgadha, as described in the
Purāṇas, is linked to the consecration ritual of the primeval ruler
Pṛthu Vainya.43 The two bards, when emerging from the sacrifi-
cial fire, were addressed very respectfully, appointed hereditary
38 L. Rocher, The Puranas, 49ff. He is said to have been addressed as
medhāvin, vaṃśakuśala, kalpajña, and mahābhāga: Vāyu Purāṇa, 1.13–29.
39 Bhāgavata Purāṇa, 1.18.18.
40 Baudhāyana Dharmasūtra, 1.9.17.8; Manu’s Code of Law, 10.11, 17, 47;
Arthaśāstra, 2.30.42, 3.7.27–9.
41 Aṣṭādhyāyī of Pāṇini, 3.1.146–7.
42 Arthaśāstra, 3.13.30, 2.27.6. The rather uncomplimentary associations
with these professions were probably because the author of the text treated all
professions which were itinerant as suspicious.
43 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 1.13.41ff.
Genealogies in the Making of a Historical Tradition 275
chroniclers, and asked to recite the lineage of Pṛthu. Their names
would associate them with the territories of Aṅga and Magadha,
located on the fringes of the ārya­varta, said to be inhabited by
the mleccha and the vrātya, the impure people of low culture. The
story provided an exalted status to the original keepers of the
tradition, even if associated with a culture regarded as somewhat
alien. Despite their low status they were gradually acculturated.44
Possibly, at this stage, the genealogical tradition was separate, to
be later amalgamated with other traditions, when taken over by
brāhmaṇa authors as part of the Puranic texts.
A distinction has to be maintained between the high-status,
learned brāhmaṇa, and the one who reworks data collected from
the sūta. A generalized link is made to Vedic authority,45 but the
essentials of these texts are different. It is claimed that they are
transmitting that which in some cases has not so far been revealed.
This is a way of validating new information.
4. The Contents of the Viṣṇu Purāṇa
From the perspective of the itihāsa­purāṇa tradition, the Viṣṇu
Purāṇa is probably the best example, for it appears to have fewer
interpolations. Its composition is consistently that of a single
text.46 The structure of the Viṣṇu Purāṇa conforms more closely
to the five aṃśas (parts) required of a Purāṇa.47 A description of
the creation of the world, as well as the geography of the universe,
precedes the genealogical section thus providing both a temporal
and spatial context to the past. It also provides a context to the
eschatology of the Purāṇas.
The opening section, on primary creation, considers the origin
of the universe and of human society within an all-encompassing
cosmology.48 The world was created by Viṣṇu, with kāla (time)
44 The Mahābhārata uses the epithet vrātyam sūtam: Anuśāsana parvan,
48.10.
45 G. Bonazzoli, “Remarks on the Nature of the Purāṇas”, 77–113.
46 R.C. Hazra, Studies in the Puranic Records of Hindu Rites, 18.
47 The Vishnu Purana, ed. and trans. H.H. Wilson, rpnt with an Introduction
by R.C. Hazra; V.R.R. Dikshitar, “The Age of Visnu Purana”, 46–50.
48 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 1.
276 The Past Before Us
as a causal factor. The symbolic measurement of time, both
human and divine, described in some detail provides the frame-
work for cosmological time. The earliest events take place in the
first time cycle of the Kṛta yuga, and are essential to the beginnings
of Puranic eschatology.
Legends are narrated with purposeful intent. The birth of Manu
Svayambhu, the self-born, is described, as is the descent of the
celestials.49 Interspersing genealogies with legends and myths cre-
ated a transition between myth and that past which was perceived
to have happened. It also extended the story—always useful to
bardic recitations—covered up breaks in succession, explained
alliances and enmities, and validated unusual social customs. The
Vedas are revealed, followed by the creation of the four varṇas, to
enable the performance of sacrifices— which gives them a ritual
context. In the third time cycle, the Tretā yuga, sin enters human
life through the agency of those opposed to the Vedas.50 Implicit
in this is the equation of time with change. The perfection of the
Golden Age of the Kṛta yuga is now tarnished.
The story of Pṛthu Vainya, frequently related in many texts,
is recounted in a Puranic version.51 This was important because
Pṛthu was a descendant of the earliest rulers, the Manus, and an
ancestor of Manu Vaivasvat, seventh in the line. In the Purāṇa the
story is extraneous to the vaṃśānucarita as the relationship with
Manu is ambiguous. It seems to illustrate the contention between
ritual specialist and ruler, as well as explain the expulsion of
forest-dwellers from mainstream society and their ensuing low
status,52 as with those who dwell in the Vindhya mountains.53 The
forest-dweller preceded the cultivator and may on that account
too have been seen as the earlier inferior person.
Pṛthu became the legitimate ruler, was given the title of rājā
because he pleased—anurañjita—his subjects, the same ety-
mology as given in the Mahābhārata. Characteristic of utopian
49 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 1.7.1ff.
50 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 1.6.29ff.
51 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 1.13.8ff.
52 Manu’s Code of Law, 10.39, 4.79.
53 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 1.13.36ff.; Bhāgavata Purāṇa, 4.14.45–6; Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa
2.36.11–46.
Genealogies in the Making of a Historical Tradition 277
conditions was that grain and milk were produced without labour.54
Pṛthu carried the mark of Viṣṇu’s cakra (disc) on his hand and is
therefore described as a cakravartin, as powerful as the gods and
associated with conquest. The Buddhists used it for a universal
monarch whose rule was associated with the wheel of law.
Brahmā performed a yajña at the birth of Pṛthu. Out of the
sacrificial fire there sprang the sūta and the māgadha, who were
instructed to praise the lord of men.55 The sūta was recording the
past, making predictions, and to that extent commenting on the
present. This version of the myth captures many features of the
historical perceptions of the time, such as states incorporating
forest lands into their domains, and forest-dwellers being dis-
missed as inferior.
The disjuncture between grāma and araṇya—the settled village
and the forest—is a running thread in social history.56 The myth
provides a justification for treating forest-dwellers with con -
tempt. Niṣāda, together with Bhilla, Śabara, and Pulinda, becomes
a generic term, connoting those for whom the forest is their habi-
tat. Also included here is a caution against states without rulers
bringing about lawlessness.57 Such a condition is set right with
establishing a rājā and the emergence of varṇas, which bring
order into society. The rājā is invested with the power of daṇḍa
(coercion). This picture is contrasted with that of a pristine age,
when there was an absence of both varṇas and coercion,58 there
being no need for either.
Multiple myths follow, tracing the descent of deities and sug-
gestive of the merging of traditions. Reference is made to the
mind-born progeny of Brahmā, among whom are the Bhṛgu and
Aṅgirasa brāhmaṇas,59 who play an important role in the histori-
cal tradition.
The duties of the four castes as given may in times of dis-
tress be modified. The four āśramas or stages of life—student,
54 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 1.13.50.
55 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 1.13.51–7.
56 R. Thapar, “Perceiving the Forest: Early India”, 1–16.
57 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 1.13.30–2.
58 Vāyu Purāṇa, 1.8.60, 1.8.155, 1.8.55–8.
59 Vāyu Purāṇa, 1.59.88.
278 The Past Before Us
householder, anchorite, ascetic—are listed, as well as the rites
of passage for each, as are other matters pertaining to social
obligations. This section reads like an encapsulation of the
Dharmaśāstras, setting forth the normative position but with
the addition of some features from contemporary belief and
custom.
The section on prati­sarga (secondary creation) is essentially
concerned with the cosmos and the geography of the earth. The
universe is shaped like an egg, its size measuring infinite space.
The earth lies at the centre, with seven nether regions (pātāla) be-
low it, where evil-doers are sent after death and which is peopled
by demons. Above it are another six directions, the lokas. At the
centre of the earth is Jambudvīpa, circular and surrounded by
seven concentric oceans and continents, at the core of which is
Mount Meru, the centre of the universe. Jambudvīpa is divided
by mountain ranges into seven parts, among which one is Bhārata-
varṣa. Whereas the wider geography is fanciful, that of Bhārata-
varṣa is less so, even if not always precise,60 a mix of imagination and
some geographical names. Places referred to as janapadas (settle-
ments of clans and peoples) are a trifle more accurate. Geographi-
cal information, whether accurate or not, is set in a larger canvas
of cosmology referring to other continents, nether regions, space,
planets, and constellations, the movement of the sun and the moon,
and the seasons.
The third aṃśa (section) of the Purāṇa treats of the time
dimension of cosmology in some detail.61 An attempt is made
to reconcile various forms of time-reckoning, such as the kalpa,
manvantara, and the yugas. The kalpa covers the creation and the
destruction of the universe. We are told that Brahmā created Manu
Svayambhu, the self-born, who was followed by a sequence of
Manus, each of whose time-period, the manvantara, is described
and is almost a reckoning of infinite time. Each is associated with
60 D.C. Sircar, Studies in the Geography of Ancient and Medieval India; M.R.
Singh, Geographical Data in the Early Puranas; S.B. Chaudhuri, Ethnic Settle­
ments in Ancient India: A Study of the Puranic Lists of the Peoples of Bhārata­
varṣa.
61 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 3.1.7ff.
Genealogies in the Making of a Historical Tradition 279
a group of deities, of ṛṣis and of sons, culminating in the seventh
Manu, Vaivasvat, in the present cycle of time. There are still more
manvantaras to follow after the destruction of the present. Each
manvantara is a repetition of an earlier one and the Vedas, when
they disappear at the end of this period, have to be revealed afresh.
The ṛṣis teach the dharma and the Vedas in each manvantara; con-
tinuity is maintained by each group repeating what it has heard
from the one in the preceding manvantara.62 But the manvantara
is not intended as a specific unit of time. The universe is tied to
time and since Viṣṇu incorporates time, time is also a creator,
preserver, and destroyer of the universe.63
The manvantara was one form of time-reckoning, more closely
tied to the Manus, but different from the mahāyuga—the cycle of
four yugas. It has been suggested that time was structured in two
ways, perhaps indicating a different authorship and narrative.
Eventually, the concept of the four yugas prevailed. The manvan­
tara reckoning may have been intended initially for the period of
the Manus, whereas the mahāyuga was more closely tied to kṣatriya
descent groups and dynasties.
This is followed by a fierce denunciation of sects that do not
follow the Vedas and the Dharmaśāstras. These are the nagna
or naked mendicants—presumably Digambara Jainas and those
clothed in raktāmbara (red cloth), the Buddhists. Viṣṇu creates
“Māhāmoha”, a false teacher of delusory ideas who preaches
anti-Vedic beliefs to the sinful and ensures their damnation. The
teaching is evil because it gives equal validity to theories that
contradict Vedic belief, that oppose animal sacrifice, and that
question the efficacy of caste rules. Many pāṣaṇḍas (false sects)
are created by Māhāmoha. There was thus a currency of oppos-
ing ideologies. Eventually, these are among the reasons that bring
about the dystopia that leads to the calamitous decline of the
universe, coinciding with the end of the time-cycle.
The fourth aṃśa of the Purāṇa contains the descent lists of the
62 J.E. Mitchiner, “The Evolution of the Manvantara Theory as Illustrated
by the Saptaṛṣi Manvantara Traditions”, 7–37; L. Gonzales-Reiman, The
Mahābhārata and the Yugas, 3–4.
63 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 1.2.15ff.
280 The Past Before Us
ruling families, the vaṃśānucarita. It begins with the Manus, then
moves to the genealogies of the kṣatriyas, and the final section
lists the dynasties and kings of each.
The fifth describes the Kṛṣṇa incarnation of Viṣṇu and is replete
with legends on his life. A brief sixth section considers the theories
on the four ages and the ultimate destruction of the world. Possibly,
this section was added when the theory of the four yugas overtook
that of the manvantaras. Thus the text itself completes the cycle
and the reader can return to the beginning with the description
of primary creation.
5. The Vaṃśānucarita
A significant question would be why genealogies, whether actual
or invented, came to be important to the perception of the past.
Why were they embedded in texts with a religious sectarian
identity? The timeframe is continuous, but the patterns within
the succession lists indicate historical change. The pattern is not
arbitrary, nor the time when it was formulated. (Incidentally, such
patterns suggest a perspective different from that of the colonial
construction of the early Indian past, which was based on racial
identities.)
That this perspective was expressed through genealogies has to
do with the centrality of clan and caste in Indian society: a system
in which genealogical connections (actual or fictional) are social
imperatives. It comes to form what might be called a genealogical
mode of recording the past. That it was embedded, but not firmly,
in religious sectarian texts was probably for the same reasons that
the hero-lauds of earlier times were part of the ṛgvedic hymns—
they received attention and were preserved. The genealogies are
more frequently found in Vaiṣṇava Purāṇas, and this in a sense
links them to the Bhāgavata redactions of the epics.
Until recently, genealogies had little respectability as historical
data among historians. It was only with the work of anthropologists
and some social historians that what was earlier regarded as fanci-
ful concoction began to be subjected to serious study.64 Genealogy
64 J. Vansina, Oral Tradition as History; D.P. Henige, The Chronology of
Oral Tradition.
Genealogies in the Making of a Historical Tradition 281
is not just a matter of real or fanciful history. Genealogies claim
to be past records, although their preservation or even invention
can derive from the social institutions of the present, including
kingship, for which they are legitimizing mechanisms. Thus the
kṣatriya descent lists recall clan society, yet some later dynasties
claimed kṣatriya status by linking their ancestry to one of the
lineages. Genealogies need not be taken as faithful records of the
past, but they can claim to be memories of social relations and
therefore have an important social function since succession can
relate not only to transfer of property but also status. Genealogies
can be rearranged if need be in accordance with the requirements
of later times, as in the sorting out of kṣatriyas into the Solar and
Lunar lines—the Sūryavaṃśa and the Candravaṃśa. Where they
record migration, fission or assimilation, they do so by separating
or incorporating lineages in relation to the established ones. Myth
and history in such perceptions of the past run parallel, occasion-
ally intersecting.65
Genealogies are also a commemoration of those who have
passed away and hint at a cult of the dead. Supposed ancestors do
not necessarily have to be biological. Frequently, the earlier por-
tions of lengthy genealogies are fabricated. They are required in
order that status be bestowed on those making the claims. There-
fore, the nature of connections sought by those constructing the
genealogy is significant.
Genealogies become important at points of historical change,
either with the entry of new social groups or factions, or in periods
of competition when existing authority feels threatened. Treating
them as legal charters and rearranging the fragments or compiling
them into a coherent whole is closely tied to the changing political
status of the person or family which is the subject of the genea-
logy. The historical reasons for the compiling of genealogies are
therefore as significant as the actual pattern of the compilation.66
Genealogical lists claim to be arranged chronologically. This
involves time reckoning, where even a confused genealogy may
65 J. Goody and I. Watt, “The Consequences of Literacy”, 304–45.
66 M. Fortes, “The Structure of Unilineal Descent Groups”, American Anthro­
pologist, 17–41.
282 The Past Before Us
nevertheless suggest a period of time. They need not be seen as a
record of what happened—although in the later phases they often
are seen as such—but they do implicitly in representing the past
become a perspective on it. Other sources mention a tradition of
maintaining genealogies in India in early times. Megasthenes, a
friend of Seleucus Nicator, wrote an account of India in the fourth
century bc, where he states that up to the time of Sandracottos
(later identified as Candragupta Maurya) the Indians counted 153
kings over 6042 years.67 Pliny has the figure at 154 kings over a
period of 6451 years.68 Despite the heavy inflation in numbers,
the focus on genealogies is striking.
From the Puranic perspective the vaṃśānucarita is a book of
genesis. It begins with myths of creation and cosmology but con-
centrates on the succession of those who are presumed to have
wielded power. It assumes for the earlier periods the centrality of
high status through birth and therefore access to power, and claims
to provide the genealogies of all the kṣatriyas of Bhāratavarṣa,
although in effect it is largely limited to parts of northern India.
The reciting of the vaṃśānucarita is attributed to Parāśara, in
response to a request by Maitreya. There is no mention of a sūta
at this point, although in some Purāṇas the sūta recites a por-
tion.69 An indirect reason for maintaining these lists is perhaps
the fear that the past will be forgotten. A comment is made on the
impermanence even of great heroes, of yajamānas (patrons of the
sacrifice), and the tapasvi ascetics. It is said that even Pṛthu has
vanished like a cotton pod thrown into the fire.70 Was this a fear
also born from the fact that alternative historical traditions were
becoming prevalent?
An attempt will be made here to analyse the vaṃśānucarita of
the Viṣṇu Purāṇa. Its construction appears to have been based on
three sequential periods with distinctly different patterns. The first
narrates the period of the Manus narrating myths of creation and
cosmology. This period is set aside because of the great Flood,
subsequent to which comes the second period. This constructs a
67 Arrian, Indica, 9.9; Solinus 52.5.
68 Pliny: Natural History, 6.21.4–5.
69 Viṣṇu Purāṇa 4.1.1–4.
70 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 4.24.144–5.
Genealogies in the Making of a Historical Tradition 283
record of what was perceived as the lineages of ruling clans. It
traces the descent of the kṣatriya lineages from their progenitor
Manu, via the two main descent groups, the Sūryavaṃśa and the
Candravaṃśa. These include, among others, the families and clans
of the Mahābhārata and the Rāmāyaṇa. The third section is a list-
ing of kings and dynasties, reflecting the establishment of kingship
and the state. It focuses initially on Magadha and continues up to
the Gupta rulers of the mid-first millennium ad, and possibly a
little later.71 These three distinctive patterns reflect a perception
of historical change in northern India.
6. Manu and the Flood
There is much in the first part—the time of the Manus—that con-
forms to reconstruction through myth. Time is seen as infinity and
the narrative is almost chronos-free, a time when gods and men
mingled. The narrative, in the form of a dialogue between the
bard and the sage, begins with the god Brahmā. Descent is traced
from the gods via Dakṣa, Aditi, and the seven Manus who ruled
at the beginning of time, associated with enormous timespans.
During the reign of the seventh Manu there occurs the great Flood
which destroys everything. But Manu survives to become the an-
cestor to the two main kṣatriya lineages, the Sūryavaṃśa and the
Candravaṃśa.72 The Flood is a time-marker.
The story of the Flood, first mentioned in the Śatapatha
Brāhmaṇa and repeated in the Mahābhārata, is elaborated upon
in the Matsya Purāṇa, although the versions differ in details.73
The story was clearly important, repeatedly narrated with some
modification. The Puranic version centres on the perspective of
the past.
In the Matsya Purāṇa the fish becomes an incarnation of Viṣṇu.
In this form Viṣṇu predicts first a drought and then a flood. The
ship, tied to the horn of the fish, carries Manu, various deities,
71 A.B.L. Awasthi, History from the Puranas, maintains that there are refer-
ences to post-Gupta history in some Purāṇas, but these suggestions are not
convincing.
72 Table IV (p. 318) summarizes the Puranic pattern.
73 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 1.8.1.1–10; Mahābhārata, 3.185; Matsya Purāṇa,
1.16ff.
284 The Past Before Us
the seed of all creatures, some embodied rivers, ṛṣis, the Vedas
and Purāṇas, and various branches of knowledge. The inclusion
of the Puranic texts is crucial to the status of the Matsya Purāṇa
itself. The change of deity from Brahmā in the Mahābhārata to the
matsya, the fish incarnation of Viṣṇu, marks a departure.74
Manu, returning after the waters subsided, was desirous of sons,
so he performed a sacrifice. The first child (although in some texts
this was the last child) was Ilā, literally the name for sacrificial
food or libation,75 who was born a woman because of a fault in the
ritual! Other versions state that the male Ila was transformed into
the female Ilā to eventually become a hermaphrodite, kiṃpuruṣa,
or that Ila was alternately male and female for specific periods.76
The female Ilā was the eponymous ancestor of the Candravaṃśa,
and Manu’s eldest son Ikṣvāku of the Sūryavaṃśa. The restoration
of life after the Flood has to be brought about through ritual, and
there is an interweaving of sacrifice and procreation.77
Of all the multiplicity of Flood stories from various cultures,
these versions parallel most closely the story in the earlier Meso-
potamian texts.78 The latter speak of the seven pre-diluvian kings
with inordinately long reigns, and the survivor who is associated
with the descent of kingship onto various cities of Mesopotamia.
The seven sages are also mentioned. Regnal years use figures
similar to those given in the later Puranic time cycles, such as 1200,
32,400, and 64,800. The figure of 1200 is mentioned as the last
segment of time, in which the population increased and became
a source of irritation to the gods. Each successive cycle is said to
be of 4800 years. These figures are repeated by the Babylonian
Berossus with reference to Chaldean chronology, where mention
74 A fish with a horn is known in the whale family—the narwhal—and now
only in the Arctic. Greek authors refer to huge sea animals like whales near the
Makran coast. Arrian, Anabasis Alexandri, Books V to VII, Indica, 30.
75 Ṛgveda, 5.41.19.
76 Matsya Purāṇa, XI.40 to XII.50.
77 J.C. Heesterman, “The Flood Story in Vedic Ritual”, in idem, The Inner
Conflict of Tradition, 59ff.
78 W.G. Lambert and A.R. Millard, Atra­hasis. This story was also the source
for the Biblical version of Noah and the Flood (Genesis 6.5–8.22); E.A. Speiser,
Genesis, 9, 55.
Genealogies in the Making of a Historical Tradition 285
is made of 36,000 and 64,800 years. Berossus writes of ten patri-
archs from Adam to Noah and of ten kings from the creation to the
Flood, ascribing to them a period of 432,000 years, a figure that
features in the mahāyuga theory of time.79 He also mentions eight
sages, and the first of these is fish-like in appearance. The Sumer-
ian god Enki, who saves mankind, is often represented as a fish
in later Mesopotamian mythology. As a contrast to the enormous
length of the pre-diluvian regnal years, the post-diluvian drop to
credible figures. The Flood seems to mark a past which is more
mythical, as distinct from the later one, which is more real.
Given the close connections between the Harappans and the
Mesopotamians, the story may have been current in Harappan
times and come down as part of an earlier tradition. Alternatively,
it may have become familiar from Assyrian sources closer in
time to the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, which is later than the Sumerian
source. Flood legends seem to have been common in the eastern
Mediterranean and are mentioned by Plato and Strabo.80 What
is significant is that the beginning of history in Puranic terms is
traced to a myth which has links not with Indo-European sources
but with those in West Asia. The Iranian variant of the Flood
story—which might have been included in Vedic mythology given
the closeness between Old Iranian and Indo-Aryan—is absent.
This is not the narrative of a flood but of a freeze resulting from
endless winters which brings life to a standstill. The earth also suf-
fers from overcrowding, thus echoing the Mesopotamian version.
The ark is not a ship but a cubical enclosure which eventually is
placed inside a mountain.
The Flood in the Purāṇa assumes the primary precondition
of water, out of which the known creation arises. The reason for
including it in the myth of genesis is perhaps because it represents
the pralaya, the calamitous termination of the previous creation,
from the ruins of which the new creation arose. No reason is given
for the Flood, unlike the Mesopotamian version where it is a pun-
ishment. The Puranic version suggests a cleaning away of the past,
but Manu, and those that survived in his boat, represent continuity.
79 S.M. Burstein (ed. and trans.), The Babylonica of Berossus, 19–21.
80 Geography of Strabo, 13.1; Plato: Timaeus, III, 677–80.
286 The Past Before Us
The Flood can also be a stage in the cycle of time, perhaps what
Eliade would call the abolition of profane time,81 where the Flood
is a marker separating the ending of one creation and the starting
of another, or even the time of origins, seen from the perspective
of later events. The remote past of the Manus is narrated through
myths, not through genealogical connections. The beginnings of
history emerge from a condition which has no antecedents. Manu/
mānava would inevitably have survived, but he acquires prestige
through being chosen to survive. This, in turn, gives added prestige
to those who claim descent from him, and who are listed in the
second part of the genealogical record.
7. The Lineages
The second part of the vaṃśānucarita introduces the children of
Manu. They are eponymous ancestors of the various lineages listed
in detail, the vaṃśam rājñyam, and this “succession of rājās” is
not grouped into dynasties but into lineages. Many of these are
kin-related, literally claiming a line of descent from a common
ancestor. They are also referred to as kṣatriyas, those with kṣatra
(power). The descent groups are worked out in a neat structure
of genealogical patterns. Interspersed within the lists are legends
and myths, suggesting perhaps points of change or break. The
inclusion of genealogies in a ritual text is again an attempt at
using sanctification to ensure preservation.
These legends are not arbitrary. Some are variants on what were
referred to as itihāsa in earlier sources, their choice thus being
deliberate. They provide clues to social custom and define the
ethos of the kṣatriya, among which are the digvijayas of Mandhātṛ
and Sagara; and the svayamvaras. Both are expressive of heroic
societies, but change their meaning in later periods. The digvijaya
begins to reflect a fantasy of conquest with a rhetoric of names.
Listing conquered areas is also a mechanism for defining one’s
own territory, but the lists should preferably be read as statements
on what was known of the wider world and current relation-
ships between clans. When reference is made to the parentage of
Bharata, there is a quotation from the Mahābhārata version of the
81 M. Eliade, Cosmos and History, 115ff.
Genealogies in the Making of a Historical Tradition 287
story, the epic being treated as a historical source.82 The descent
list of the Pūrus is substantially from the Mahābhārata, although
there are deviations. A few names echo the Vedic corpus.83 Was
this an attempt to include these names to give them continuity and
a hint of historicity?
Manu’s eldest son, Ikṣvāku, the progenitor of the Sūryavaṃśa,
had three sons, two of whom were important and established them-
selves at Kosala and Videha, contiguous territories in the middle
Ganges plain and important to the narrative of the Rāmāyaṇa.
The rulers of Kosala and Videha are therefore of collateral lines.
The Rāmāyaṇa is an epic of the Sūryavaṃśa. The form of this
genealogy is the presumed record of descent from father to eldest
son. Younger sons are not mentioned barring exceptional cases.
Collaterals can be set aside when the purpose is to record the
transmission of property and office going from father to eldest
son. Patrilineal descent is heavily underlined, as also the unchal-
lenged right to succession of the eldest son. Thus the narrative of
the Rāmāyaṇa becomes all the more meaningful in this context.
The initial genealogy would have terminated with Rāma, but the
addition to the epic takes it to his sons.
The Rāmāyaṇa preserves a list which differs from the Purāṇas
both in numbers of generations and the ordering of succession.84
Lengthening and shortening of the lists is not uniform. In this
process, a few relationships may be altered while others are omit-
ted, and some new names added. Synchronizing generations in
different lineages is not thought necessary. Lengthening through
added numbers of generation is generally associated with more
centralized polities. Whereas such succession need not be accurate
over an extended period, it does point to an attempt to project a
relatively stable political society.
The descent lists in the Purāṇas and the epics are not identical.
The Purāṇas appear to have telescoped the earlier generations, a
technique often used by genealogists and which has been described
as structural amnesia. The Rāmāyaṇa reflects a more durable
82 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 4.19.12–14; Mahābhārata, 1.69.29ff.
83 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 4.19ff.
84 Rāmāyaṇa, 1.70–1.
288 The Past Before Us
polity in the kingdom of Kosala through its lineage, as compared
to the area of exile such as Kiṣkindhā and Daṇḍakāraṇya where
lineages are absent. The society associated with the Sūryavaṃśa
lineage was being shown as politically more stable.
The lineage of Janaka suggests fabricated genealogies. Janaka,
descended from Ikṣvāku, emerged from a manthana or churning,
since his father was Videha, literally “without a body”. The myth
echoes the story of the churning of Vena. Sītā was found in a sītā
(furrow) and adopted. The genealogy terminates with this.
The genealogical pattern of the Candravamśa (the Lunar line)
is a contrast to that of the Solar. From Manu’s female child Ilā
is descended a vast spread of clans classified as Candravaṃśa.
Women standing at the apex of a clan, or myths of celestial women
as the mothers of heroes, may suggest a different kind of clan
organization.85 The genealogical pattern of the Candravaṃśa
records the descent of all the sons in the early part of the geneal-
ogy, and each forms a segment of the main lineage. The lists of
descent do not come down in neat parallels but fan out laterally
and inevitably cover a larger geographical space. This is similar
to what has been described as segmentary lineage systems.86 The
obvious suggestion is that segments of these clans were given to
migrating or fissioning off. But this pattern can equally be seen
as attempts to assimilate other groups by inducting them into the
lineage. This would have enlarged the geographical extent of the
lineage identity. The Candravaṃśa has a larger number of clan
names than personal names.
The descendants of Yadu, as segments of the Candravaṃśa,
seem particularly prone to fanning out or incorporating new
groups. The fanning out involved situations of conflict. These
are referred to—even the attack on Ayodhyā by the Haihayas,
a branch of the Yadus who are said to have had their stronghold
at Mahiśmati on the Narmada river.87 This is a contrast to the
comp aratively static nature of the Ikṣvāku descendants, who seem
not to move away from the middle Ganges plain, suggesting a more
85 This is said to be common in patrilineal polygynous societies. Personal
communication from S.C. Humphreys.
86 M.D. Sahlins, “The Segmentary Lineage: An Organisation of Predatory
Expansion”, 332–45.
87 This episode has been discussed in Chapter 5.
Genealogies in the Making of a Historical Tradition 289
stable kingdom. Presumably, this was how Kosala was viewed in
retrospect at the time when the early Purāṇas were written.
Sometimes the founding ancestress of a segment is an apsarā,
such as Urvaśī or Menakā, whose identity remains obscure. This
becomes a ploy to paper over breaks. Some descent groups are
named from ancestors, and some among these become clan names.
Repeated patterns include that of five sons, three from one wife
and two from another. The five sons of the famous Yayāti, the
eldest Yadu and the youngest Pūru, are ancestors to the two most
significant segments of this lineage and form a substantial part
of the Candravaṃśa.88
Pūru, despite being the youngest son, inherits the core of the
territory and Yadu has to migrate to the south-west. A myth is
introduced to explain this reversal of primogeniture in which Pūru,
unlike Yadu, agrees to exchange his youth for his father’s old age.
Yadu, Turvasa, and Pūru are mentioned as rājās in the dāna­stutis.
Some others are also mentioned with Kuru as a prefix in their
names, and Kasu the Cedi is especially wealthy. The main line of
the Pūrus controls the Ganga-Yamuna Doab. Their descendents
at a much later generational date are contestants in claims to this
territory as narrated in the Mahābhārata. The descendents of both
Pūru and Yadu have ambiguous caste identities since few are
recognized as kṣatriyas in other sources, although they are listed
as such in the vaṃśānucarita.
However, despite the projection of a seemingly smooth descent,
there are also some barely disguised breaks in succession. An
obvious break is the story of Bharata adopting a son, Bharadvāja,
on the grounds that none of his sons were suitable. Further along
in the line of Pūru descent, Hastin is followed by three sons,
each of whom has the suffix -mīḍha in their names, suggesting
“spurinyms”.89 Another break is the story of Devāpi and Śantanu,
which takes us back to the itihāsas of the Vedic corpus.
Artificial lengthening of the descent list is evident from the
88 Yayāti’s five sons—Yadu, Anu, Turvasa, Druhyu, and Pūru—appear
almost at the start of the descent list. Towards the end of the list come the five
Pāṇḍavas—Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīma, Arjuna, Nakula, and Sahadeva.
89 D.P. Henige, Chronology of Oral Tradition, 40ff. A spurinym is a clearly
spurious name.
290 The Past Before Us
use of toponyms and geographical names, such as the five sons of
Bali—Aṅga, Vaṅga, Kaliṅga, Suhma, and Puṇḍra.90 The genea-
logical construction in the Purāṇas ties together the scattered
stories of persons, placing them in a framework that draws on the
past. This can also be seen as an attempt at unifying the segments.
In this process of restructuring, strangers get grafted in and oth-
ers get detached.91 The new entrants either come in laterally via
a marriage alliance, or vertically as inheritors and successors.
Recognizing these processes remains problematic.
Such recognition could come from customs, such as bride-
price, marriage by abduction, cross-cousin marriage, and frater-
nal polyandry—not prominently propagated in the normative
Dharmaśāstra texts. These occur in the stories punctuating the
descent lists of the Candravaṃśa, reflecting a variety of kinship
systems, some dissimilar from those of the Sūryavaṃśa.92 Could
some of these have come from societies different from the familiar
agricultural communities?93 The dichotomy between the norma-
tive texts and actual social forms becomes a pointer to recording
social change through specific peoples, even if not historically
accurate over their particulars.
The story of the Syamanta jewel, bestowing prosperity upon
its owner, encapsulates the Yadu clan system.94 There appears to
have been competition and suspicion among the clans, therefore
the jewel is closely guarded by one among them. At the point
when it is lost, it is recovered by Kṛṣṇa, who is then welcomed by
all the Yadu clans—sakalayādavaḥ—and the women of the clans.
In order to make clear that he had not stolen it, Kṛṣṇa explains
the events to the yādavasamāja (the gathering of the Yadu clans).
This starts a series of intrigues involving clan hierarchies and
rivalries as well as alliances. There are continuous references to
Yadusamāja, Yadukula, Yaduvaṃśa, Yaduloka. The legends that
punctuate the genealogies are taken from earlier Vedic and epic
sources but are not identical. Linking earlier tradition with the
90 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 4.18.13ff.
91 L. Bohanan, “A Genealogical Charter”, 301–15; E. Peters, “The Prolifera-
tion of Segments in the Lineage of the Bedouin of Cyrenaica”, 29–53.
92 E.g., 4.7.21; T. Trautmann, Dravidian Kinship, 238ff.
93 K. Gough, Matrilineal Kinship.
94 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 4.13.111ff.
Genealogies in the Making of a Historical Tradition 291
current reconstruction gave authority to both. The Yadu clans are
mentioned as a collective and in the plural, whereas the Pūrus are
mentioned more frequently by name.
Candravaṃśa descent does not invariably claim to list a
father to son succession. The relationship between generations is
frequently left ambiguous, with statements such as “B” followed
“A”, or “B” was the heir of “A”, or “B” was of “A” or “B” was after
“A”.95 This is in contrast to the more specific mention of “B” being
the son—putra or ātmaja—of “A”.96 There is a frequency in the
use of forms connoting “being of”, such as tatasca, tasya, tasmād,
tena, tata, tattanya.97
The geography and migration of the Candravaṃśa lineages,
and of the Yadus in particular, would include West and Central
India, the Narmada and the Vindhyas, and large parts of the edge
of the Ganges plain—a far wider spread than the more concise
circuit of the Sūryavaṃśa in approximately the middle Ganges
plain. The inclusion of some geographical locations could be the
attempt of genealogists grouping varieties of peoples into neat
genealogical packages, not entirely arbitrary. A consciousness
of geographical space is apparent in the apportioning of space
through the locations of the clans.
Barring the names and generational descent that occur in other
sources as well, the rest of the names could be arbitrary and listed
as fillers. These genealogies indicate the distribution of clans, their
claims and alliances, prior to the rise of the kingdom of Magadha
in the mid-first millennium bc. Such kinship links may have some
veracity, but essentially the representation is of what was believed
to have been the political and social co-ordinates of earlier times.
The seamless genealogies suggest pre-state societies, or those in
the process of mutating into kingdoms. The kṣatriya clans are of
relatively equal status; the connections are through birth, even if
they are fictional. Legends woven in from the Mahābhārata are
attempts to draw on the authority of itihāsa. These are neces-
sary to cover up breaks, to explain alliances to validate unusual
customs, or even caricature some activities. The grand finale of
this section is the war at Kurukṣetra, where all the clans face each
95 F.E. Pargiter, Ancient Indian Historical Tradition, 89.
96 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 4.16.1ff.; 4.19.1ff.
97 E.g., 4.8.18–21, 11.10, 12.2, 14.2–5, 21.12–16.
292 The Past Before Us
other and the war becomes the time-marker terminating kṣatriya
clan societies.
A little digression at this point is perhaps in order, touching on
aspects significant to the patterns of these two descent groups and
attempting to explain why a genealogical mode of recording the
past was appropriate. Apart from the question of the veracity of
genealogies as a form of remembering the past, such forms were
central to the society of the Ganges plain and its fringes in the
period prior to the rise of states. The oral tradition had, in its rep-
ertoire, recitations in praise of heroes past and present. Occasions
for displaying prowess such as cattle raids gave way to disputes
over clearing and settling land, where settlements would be subject
to attack especially if they encroached on existing habitations.
Settlement called for an organized migration, often led by
kṣatriya families who lent their name to the territory and amal-
gamated clan, territory, and claims to sovereignty. This was seminal
to the eventual instituting of the state. The clan chief or rājā could
gradually evolve into a king but retaining the title “rājā”.
The lineage claimed by the dominant clan determined the
identity of those most respected. The Kuru, Pañcāla, Vatsa, Kāśī,
Kosala, and Videha occupied the area from the watershed to the
middle Ganges plain, bestowing their names on the territorial
janapadas. Those of lesser status were on their fringes. The Yadus,
based in West India, had some branches in Central India or even
further east in Orissa. Geographical knowledge had expanded at
the time when these texts were written, so there was a larger ex -
panse to choose from in locating clans.98 With the growth of urban-
ization in the mid-first millennium bc, the network of the Ganges
plain draws closer together, and Magadha gradually emerges as
the dominant region.99
There was now a distance between those who had access to or
claimed private ownership over economic resources, and those
98 Incidentally, there are hints of this from the distribution of archaeological
cultures that appear to parallel this picture in the first millennium bc, although
no definitive correlations can be made. R. Thapar, “Puranic Lineages and
Archaeological Cultures”, in idem, Ancient Indian Social History: Some Interpre­
tations, 240–67.
99 For a general discussion of the background to these historical conditions,
see R. Thapar, From Lineage to State.
Genealogies in the Making of a Historical Tradition 293
who worked on obtaining produce from these resources. The
genealogies relate to the former. Even when claims to an exten-
sive territorial identity declined, genealogies still functioned as
important indicators of social links, especially those that were
underwriting political power.
Current ideas on the origin of government supported the notion
of a single person holding office as king, whether as a nominee
of the gods or as elected by the community. The right to collect
taxes ensured further power, as did the right to coerce, which was
given to the ruler on the assumption that it was necessary for the
preservation of law and order. Such an accumulation of rights
points to the establishment of states defined as kingdoms similar
to that at Magadha—on which there is much evidence. The epics,
through their later interpolations, become charters of validation.
They support the legitimacy of such states as a new form of poli-
tical organization. The Purāṇas were of course written at a time
when kingdoms were well established.
The reconstruction of the past in the form of genealogies
provides pointers to how its social and political concerns were
viewed. The vaṃśānucarita is both a construction of the past and
a potential source for links with the future. Despite some names
being common to all these texts, there is little evidence of a sys-
tematic borrowing in the later sources from the earlier.
The notion of kinship in a genealogy was extended through
links over time. Genealogies, in any case, shift attention back
to an archaic period where eponymous ancestors and legendary
heroes are the protagonists. Nevertheless, there is a sense of time
which links this past to later generations and to contemporary
personalities. The significance of literacy can be deduced from the
length and complexity of the genealogical pattern. The Puranic
genealogies appear to have been deliberately constructed from
smaller fragments and the overall form points to presenting a
distinct perspective on the past.
What is important, therefore, is not that the genealogies do not
always tally in various sources, but that the function of this data
suggests an awareness of a changed historical situation repre-
sented in this attempt to construct the past. Genealogies, creating a
contin uous and seemingly unbroken past, relate to societies where
descent groups are more important than institutions. This pattern,
294 The Past Before Us
however, changes in the third and last part of the vaṃśānucarita,
when a new form comes to be recorded.
8. The Dynasties
The war at Kurukṣetra is a catastrophe, and catastrophes are time-
markers. As the Purāṇas put it, the war ends the splendour of the
kṣatriyas. The world and its polities are not the same thereafter.
This is reflected in distinctly new features of the record of succes-
sion. The kṣatriya clans now give way to the pedigrees of kings.
Subsequent to the war, statements about what follows are made
in the future tense, even though the text was compiled after the
events. The Viṣṇu Purāṇa maintains that it is being composed in
the reign of Parikṣit, three generations after the war. The prophetic
form includes occasional lapses into the past tense, suggesting
that it was originally written in the past tense, as was the rest of
the vaṃśānucarita, but that at some point the dynastic section was
changed to the future tense.100 The narrator of the Viṣṇu Purāṇa
says, “I will now enumerate the bhupālas, who will reign in the
future periods . . .”101 A distinction is perhaps being made between
referring to the clans as kṣatriyas and the terms now used for kings,
such as bhupāla and nṛpa (protector of the earth and of men).102
The past lay in events which took place before the war. The Pūru
line surviving the war terminates with Kṣemaka in the Kali age.
In using the future tense the narrator claims the power of
prophecy and the author’s ability to foresee events. It might also
suggest the uncertainty of the shift to dynasties, made inevitable
by the power of prophecy. The implication seems to be that those
who control the past have access to the future. Happily, the switch
to the future tense provides us today with a clue as to approxi-
mately when the text was compiled, since the prophecy stops with
contemporary dynasties.103
100 F.E. Pargiter, DKA, ixff.
101 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 4.21.1: atah paraṃ bhaviṣyānaham bhūpālān kīrtyiṣyāmi;
Vāyu Purāṇa, 2.37.256ff.
102 F.E. Pargiter, DKA, 2–3, 57.
103 The Bhaviṣya Purāṇa, composed some centuries later, carries further
information of some post-Gupta dynasties.
Genealogies in the Making of a Historical Tradition 295
The prophetic form did not, however, prevent variations among
the Purāṇas on what was to follow. A few further descendants
of the Sūryavaṃśa and the Candravaṃśa are listed, but more as
a rounding off of the descent groups. Among the former, men-
tion is made of the Buddha’s family, of Siddhartha as the son of
Śuddhodana and grandson of Śākya, and of his own son Rāhula.
Nothing further is said in this section about the Buddha.The focus
shifts from the upper Doab to the Ganga–Yamuna confluence, a
migration necessitated by a flood of the Ganges and the destruction
of the earlier capital at Hastināpura, leading to a new settlement
at Kauśāmbī.
Dynastic history is traced through the line of Magadha, and the
first dynasty mentioned, together with individual regnal years,
was that of the Bṛhadrathas. The reckoning by regnal years was
a concession to a plausible, measured concept of time. Magadha
is no longer the mleccha­deśa of earlier sources but is seen as
the region where ruling dynasties were first established. We are
told that the kings listed in this section of the vaṃśānucarita shall
include those who are of mixed caste, those regarded as of low
status (vrātya), those who are of lower caste (a­dvija), the śūdras,
foreigners and others of impure origin (mleccha), and those who
are of udit­odit vaṃśa (upstarts). There would thus be a mixing of
ārya and mleccha. This was a concession to political power being
negotiable and open to those who did not even have to claim to be
kṣatriyas in origin. Regnal years accompanying the list of bhupālas
and nṛpas do not necessarily agree in the various Purāṇas, but are
characteristic of kingship and indicate the increasing centrality
of linear time in the historical tradition. Whereas previously the
succession was that of the vaṃśam rājñyam, the later lists are of
dynasties and enumerate names and regnal years of individual
kings.104
Subsequent to the Bṛhadrathas, the Pradyotavaṃśa ruled for
138 years and are described as pṛthivīm bhokṣyanti (enjoying
the earth), a phrase not associated with the kṣatriya vaṃśas but
now occurring in association with dynasties.105 The early Śiśunāga
104 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 5.1.1: nṛpāṇām kathitassarvo bhavatā vaṃśavistaraḥ/
vaṁśānucaritam caiva yathāvadanuvarṇitam.
105 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 4.24.2, 7.
296 The Past Before Us
dynasty is permitted a minor concession in that the kings are de-
scribed as having kṣatriya kinsfolk—rājanah kṣatra bāndhavah—
or being kṣatrabandhu (so-called kṣatriyas). Of the Nandas it is
specifically said that the founder, Mahāpadma, will exterminate
all kṣatriyas—kṣatra vināśa kṛt—as did Paraśurāma of old, and
subsequent kings will be śūdras and adharmakah. This could be
a reference to his destroying the clan societies. The gaṇa-saṅghas
of the middle Ganges plain play no political role after the Nan-
das. Mahāpadma is described as eka­cchātram (sole ruler). The
brāhmaṇa Kauṭilya, we are told, will uproot the Nandas and anoint
Candragupta as king, who will found the Maurya dynasty that will
enjoy the earth (pṛthvīm bhokṣyanti) for 137 years. The enjoyment
of the earth is more frequently associated with kings. No comment
is made on the Mauryan kings, especially Aśoka, being patrons
of the heterodox. References to the low origin of the Mauryas in -
crease in the later commentaries on the Purāṇas.106
Puṣyamitra Śuṅga will assassinate his king Bṛhadratha, the
last of the Mauryas. Vasudeva, the minister of the Śuṅgas, will
overthrow the last of the Śuṅgas and establish the Kāṇva dynasty.
This is referred to as the Śuṅgabhṛtya, literally the servant of the
Śuṅga, but perhaps better rendered as “in the service of . . .”,107
these being people in administrative office who, relying on the use
of force as well as the authority of office, rose to kingship. The
last Kāṇva will be assassinated by his bhṛtya, who has the unusual
name of Balipuccha, and will inaugurate the Andhra dynasty. The
Andhras, bhṛtyas of the Kāṇvas, are succeeded in turn by their
bhṛtyas. The political ambitions of the upper bureaucracy would
seem to have often met with success in this account.
A long list of successors follows, among which feature the
Śakas, Yavanas, and Turuṣkas. The last was doubtless a reference
to Central Asians such as the Kuṣāṇas. The Guptas, mention-
ed towards the end of the list, will rule over the janapadas, of
Gaṅga, Prayāga, Sāketa, and Magadha. This is followed by a list
of territories across northern India. Those ruling in these territo-
ries are described as kings of Vidiśā, Bāhlikas, Mekala, Kosala,
106 S.N. Roy, “Textual and Historical Analysis of the Puranic Chronology
Relating to the Maurya Dynasty”, 94–106.
107 Bhṛtya, from the root bhṛ, to bear or to carry, means being dependent on,
or a servant of, and refers to one who is to be maintained or nourished.
Genealogies in the Making of a Historical Tradition 297
Niṣāda, and suchlike. It is likely that these territories were record-
ing their histories in local inscriptions and court chronicles, and
were not part of the Puranic scheme—which was anyway petering
out at this point.
At the time when the Purāṇas were being written, the kṣatriya
status could be claimed by anyone who could be legitimized by
acquiring genealogical links. This involved fewer Vedic sacri-
ficial rituals and more mahādānas (large-scale gifts), praśastis
(eulogies on the ruler), and genealogies—a few of which could
have been fabricated. The dynastic lists are followed by a list of
miscellaneous castes, territories, and communities, a contrast to the
ordered form of the dynasties. Either the dynastic data was now
too voluminous, or else there were too many states to be accounted
for in a regular manner. Recent rulers tend to be treated with con-
tempt. This was perhaps the logic of the Puranic eschatology—in
the Kaliyuga, dharma was on the way out.
Yet curiously this was the time when brāhmaṇas were begin-
ning to acquire more royal patrons than before, and although the
competition with heterodoxy continued, the latter was in decline.
Even if the Viṣṇu Purāṇa is dated to the early Christian era, when
heterodoxy was in the ascendant, the text would have been re-
vised for later times. In some Purāṇas the Yavanas are described
as following evil ways, bereft of dharma, karma, and artha, and
mingling ārya with mleccha, killing women and children, their
rule coinciding with that of upstarts.108 The misrule of these
kings contributes to the dystopia of the Kali age. The prelude to
the dystopia, prior to the arrival of Kalkin, the last incarnation of
Viṣṇu, is strikingly similar to conditions described in Buddhist
texts prior to the coming of the Buddha Maitreya, with people
fleeing to the hills for refuge.
Such statements are new to the account and underline the
capturing of political power by families with claims to pedigrees
different from the kṣatriya clans. Dynasties described here as
evidently foreign, such as the Śakas and Yavanas, do however
sometimes add kṣatriya suffixes to their names in inscriptions.109
108 N’aiva mūrdh ābhiṣiktās te bhaviṣyanti narādhipāḥ yuga dośa durācārā . . .,
F.E. Pargiter, DKA, 56; Matsya Purāṇa, 273.25–34.
109 E.J. Rapson (ed.), The Cambridge History of India, I: Ancient India,
577.
298 The Past Before Us
Foreign rulers are sometimes treated with contempt in the Purā­
ṇas, gentle contempt in some texts, but harsh and hostile aggres-
sion in others.110 The Yuga Purāṇa comes down heavily on the
Yavanas, the Hellenized Greeks, and others from West Asia.111
The three middle sons of Yadu, generally of little consequence,
are sometimes made progenitors of these alien rulers.
The reckoning of kings by regnal years was a recognition of
measured, linear time. The exaggerated lengthening of regnal
years in the early part of the dynastic section was probably to give
the sanctity of antiquity to kingship. The concept of generations
was the listing of the name of the successor. In the dynastic sec-
tion, a generation was counted when a king assumed office, since
only regnal periods are recorded. Dynastic lists are also open to
manipulation but this is different from the manipulation of lineages
and generations in a genealogy. Succession can be changed by
collapsing collaterals or erasing interregnums. The function of
the genealogy remains twofold: setting out the presumed chrono-
logy, and presenting a charter of legitimation. The dynasties are
named and sometimes bunched together in a large time bracket;
and although names and regnal years are not consistent in every
Purāṇa, the discrepancies are generally small.
This third part of the vaṃśānucarita is essentially one of non-
kṣatriya kings where dynasties changed either with the arrival
of new families or through conquest, or where administrators
usurp power, or a combination of these. The power of a minister
in a kingdom is clear from the occurrences of ministers assas-
sinating kings and founding dynasties, such as the Pradyotas,
Śuṅgas, Kāṇvas, and Āndhras. Both the Śuṅgas and Kāṇvas were
brāhmaṇa families, but presumably because they were adminis-
trators and servitors and not priests they were overlooked in the
generalization about low-caste dynasties. Brāhmaṇa ministers and
officers were obviously not ritual specialists. The justification for
brāhmaṇas removing an ineffective king goes back to the story
of Vena. There is a gradual increase in dynasties which do not
110 Matsya Purāṇa, 273.25–33; Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 4.24.70–80; F.E. Pargiter,
DKA, 56.
111 J. Mitchiner, The Yuga Purāṇa; D.C. Sircar, “Problems of the Yuga
Purāṇa”, in Studies in Yugapurāṇa and Other Texts, 1–17.
Genealogies in the Making of a Historical Tradition 299
even claim to have been dvijas (twice-born), pointing to a new
understanding of political power. Some Purāṇas have a small
subsection on rāja­dharma to instruct the king.112
Legitimation was now recognized less through sacrificial rituals
and more through the assertion of power. The latter was either
through conquest or through exercising administrative control,
as in the case of those described as bhṛtyas. This social condition
would conform to the statement that in the Kaliyuga caste hier-
archies and functions are overturned; inevitably, therefore, those
in power would be of lower castes or outsiders who had no caste
identity to begin with. However, in subsequent times, latching
onto the kṣatriya genealogies was to become one of the methods of
legitimizing a dynasty. Kings are no longer said to have a portion
of deity as it might have been embarrassing to make this conces-
sion to śūdras and mlecchas.
The succession lists were not continued soon after the Gupta
period because each dynasty probably sought its own record,
and this was frequently in the form of royal inscriptions and
chronicles. The vaṃśānucarita section, therefore, provided easy
access to claims of status through families linking themselves to
ancient heroes. The claim required legitimation by brāhmaṇas.
The brāhmaṇa therefore had to control the information in the
lists of heroes and kings.
The vaṃśānucarita ends with Pṛthvī reflecting on the future.113
Kings acquire exaggerated notions of power when they conquer
territory, but they frequently lose power when they fight over
what they have won. Their desire to enjoy the earth overwhelms
all else.
9. Concepts of Time
The dimension of time, inevitably present in all attempts to
structure the past, is central to patterns of succession as well.
Succession lists placed within the outer framework, as it were, of
cosmology, are differentiated from those perceived as historical.
Included in the Purāṇas, therefore, are theories of time where the
112 Matsya Purāṇa, 215–20.
113 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 4.24.128–36.
300 The Past Before Us
sequence of time is viewed in different ways, cosmological and
cyclic, genealogical and linear. The grand theory of time, the
theory of the yugas, is a play on the concept of time, a metaphor
at many levels, suggesting chronology.114 It is used in varying
contexts: from the vastness of the aeons running into thousands
of years, to the minutiae of the blinking of an eye; from time
originating as part of the cosmos to time determining the ethics of
an age or to time seen in a spatial form.115 This is not time which
is subject to calibration. Nevertheless, it cannot be ignored as it
impinges on historical consciousness.
The cyclic concept was obviously derived from observing the
regular recurrence of seasons in the rhythm of nature and the
movement of stars in the night sky. There appears to have been
an attempt to draw on figures used in contemporary studies in
mathematics and astronomy, perhaps to suggest exactitude, given
that the mid-first millennium ad was an active period in Indian
astronomy. Time as part of the cosmic view is also a tangential
reflection of the then current exploration of mathematics and astro-
nomy developing on the ideas of the Jyotiśa­vedāṅga, as also on
the dialogue with Alexandrine and Hellenist astronomers.
The concept of cyclic time is of course common to many early
cultures. Greek notions of the repeated destruction of the world
occur in Plato.116 More elaborate views are discussed by those
in favour of Mithraism, popular in pre-Christian Europe. Time
is depicted as a quadriga which travels in a circle, and the four
horses are the elements—fire, air, water, earth. The fastest of these
is the first and the cycle ends with destruction.117
Cosmological time in the Purāṇas reiterates the three cycles
of time: the almost immeasurable span of the manvantara, the
immense length of the kalpa, and the lesser four ages or yugas.118
114 C.D. Church, “The Myth of the Four Yugas in the Sanskrit Puranas”, 5–25;
R. Thapar, Time as a Metaphor of History.
115 Matsya Purāṇa, 124.13–91; Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 1.3.6ff.
116 Plato: Timaeus, III.22.
117 F. Cumont, The Mysteries of Mithra, 116ff.
118 Apart from references in the Mahābhārata and Manu mentioned in the
previous chapter, there are also descriptions in the Gārgiya Jyotiṣa, all dating
to between the third century bc and second century ad. L. Gonzales-Reiman,
“Cosmic Cycles, Cosmology, and Cosmography”, 411–28.
Genealogies in the Making of a Historical Tradition 301
The kalpa is first referred to in the inscriptions of Aśoka. The
other two come with brahmanical redactions of the epics and
Purāṇas.
Puranic chronology refers to the manvantara, as also to the
calculation based on the Kaliyuga of c. 3102 bc and the Saptaṛṣi
of c. 3176 bc as calculated in later sources.119 The two eras seem to
act as a bridge between the infinity of the manvantara cycles and
the shorter spans of descent groups and dynasties. The unit is the
yuga, the measurement of which changed from possibly meaning
one generation or even a short span of five years—according to
some, in the Ṛgveda—to 12,000 divine years or 4,320,000 human
years in Manu.120 The calculation of the start of the Kali age as
equivalent to 3102 bc made by Āryabhaṭa is further confirmed by
its use in the Aihole inscription of Pulakeśin II.121
The mahāyuga encompassing the theory of the four yugas is
the same as given in the Mahābhārata (Chapter 4). The decline
of dharma remains central to the theory, a decline that proceeds
systematically to the end. A thousand mahāyugas make a kalpa
(an aeon), each of which is followed by the destruction of the
world, often through a great deluge. This further underlined the
myth of the Flood.
The reckoning based on the kalpa is also tied to the manvantara
calculation where each manvantara is equal to a little more than
71 mahāyugas. This is truly infinite time, or almost a sense of time
which is without beginning or end,122 what might be called “deep
time”, or timeless time. Human history in the current mahāyuga
is in the period of its ultimate decline. A long view of the past
inevitably has to project it as a decline from a golden age, an initial
utopia of the Kṛta age to the present Kaliyuga. Decline reinforces
this sense of the end of an age.
Figures such as those of 4,320,000 for the mahāyuga, the cal-
culation of the precession in the ecliptic of 360 degrees, would
have been widely discussed among astronomers. Some figures
119 J. Mitchiner, “The Evolution of the Manvantara Theory . . .”, 7–37.
120 Ṛgveda, 1.139.8; Arthaśāstra, 2.20.29ff.; Manu’s Code of Law, 1.69ff.
121 L. Gonzales-Reiman, “Cosmic Cycles, Cosmology, and Cosmography”;
Aihole Inscription, Ep. Ind., 6.1ff.
122 M. Biardeau, “Etude de Mythologique Hindoue”, 19–45.
302 The Past Before Us
also occur in Babylonian astronomy, and it has been argued that
Indian astronomers were familiar with Babylonian ideas by about
c. 400 bc.123 The basic parameter of the yuga system was the Kali-
yuga of 432,000 years, which is the figure for the pre-Diluvian
kings in Babylonian sources and further quoted in Greek sources,
and which in turn is based on the sexagesimal system (2 x 60/3),
a system also in use in India. The figure 432 has as its fractions
2x2x2x2x3x3x3. To this was added the decimal system com-
monly known to Indian mathematics, and a kalpa was calculated
as 1000 mahāyugas or caturyugas. The four yugas were placed in
a descending order of 4:3:2:1.
The cyclic notion was closely related to the idea of the revolu-
tion of heavenly bodies and a number of cycles of time were in
use. Among the more popular were the five-year luni-solar cycle
of the Jyotiśa-Vedāṅga texts on astrology reconciling the lunar and
solar calendars, and the Saptaṛṣi era, an imaginary cycle of about
2700 or 2800 years based on the theory that the constellation of
the Saptaṛṣi (the Great Bear) stays for 100 years in each of the 27
or 28 nakṣatras (asterisms). From the sixth century ad, the cycle
of Bṛhaspati or Jupiter became popular and was often computed
as a complete cycle of sixty years.
There was, however, a difference of opinion among astronomers
regarding the length of the yuga, and Āryabhaṭa for instance ar-
gued for an equal length of all four in the mahāyuga. There were
also differences between Puranic cosmology and the cosmology
of the astronomers, as is evident from texts by the latter question-
ing the former.124
The notion of this infinite scale of time as built into cosmol-
ogy was different from measured time. Did this reflect a tension
between those who sought the sanction of cosmological time for
a record of the past and those who wanted a more precise time
reckoning? Or was the association of cosmic time with the past
yet another device to maintain, at one level, the otherness of the
past? Cosmological time can circumscribe other systems, such
as generational and linear time, but does not exclude them. The
fantasy of numbers in this scheme of cosmological time has been
123 D. Pingree, “The Purāṇas and Jyotiḥśāstra: Astronomy”, 274–80.
124 Ibid.
Genealogies in the Making of a Historical Tradition 303
read as a “refusal of history”.125 It would seem more appropriate
to suggest that it was an attempt at distancing a mythical past
by framing it in a time concept which was palpably unreal. Not
all the Puranic versions agree on the details of the four yugas,126
thus underlining the symbolic character of the idea. In the Viṣṇu
Purāṇa, cosmological time is described in an early section of the
text which deals with creation. Genealogical chronology is in a
separate section, the vaṃśānucarita.
Varying concepts of time can also be used to demarcate histori-
cal change. Time cycles of immense scale can be ways of pushing
back the past so that primary creation, as in this case, belongs to
a time which is virtually beyond human intervention. The Golden
Age, located in this early time period, is also easier to handle
and describe since it has no limits on fantasy. Resolving conflict
between smṛti texts was by maintaining that some—recording
customs in contradiction of those currently practised—were legis-
lating for a bygone age. Such an age would have to be extremely
distant in time to relegate the practice to the past. The form of
narration can also suggest time concepts, such as the question and
answer format of the Purāṇas, which can create the impression
of linear time.127
The cyclic concept is not discussed in the vaṃśānucarita where
time would be inherently linear. Was this a method of keeping
cyclic time distinct from linear? Genealogies become a form of
sequential reckoning. To record the past in a genealogical form
could suggest that there was a core tradition which might have
been relatively fixed, but that other material could have been
change d. This was a system based on a sense of time not as clearly
historical as the precise dating of the documents of contemporary
courts or of later periods. It could also be a way of suggesting that
linear time is a segment of the arc of the larger span of cyclic time,
and that the two can intersect.
Linear time is also used in reckoning regnal years and in calcu-
lating dynastic time brackets.128 In locating these as part of the yuga
125 M. Eliade, Cosmos and History, 117.
126 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 1.3.2ff.; Vāyu Purāṇa, 8.18–63; Matsya Purāṇa, 142–4.
127 G. Bailey, “Intertextuality in the Purāṇas: A Neglected Element in the
Study of Sanskrit Literature”, 197.
128 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 4.24.104ff.; Vāyu Purāṇa, 98.409–12.
304 The Past Before Us
system, there is simultaneous use of cyclic and linear time. Was
this to accommodate a tension between mythical and measured
time, where cosmic time was used to indicate the otherness of the
past? But the past was not rejected since it was now appropriated
by recourse to linear time. Cosmological time circumscribes time
systems but does not exclude them. Was cyclic time in this form
an attempt at distancing a mythical past?
Regnal years and dynastic time periods in the third part of the
vaṃśānucarita, computed in linear time, were of a different order
from cosmic time and even from the genealogical time of lineages.
This may have had to do with the currency of eras and dates used
in other contemporary sources. The commonly used ones among
these were the Vikrama Samvat of c. 58 bc, the Śaka era of ad 78,
and the Gupta era of ad 319–20. Equally popular were the Kali-
yuga era later traced back in some reckonings to the equivalent of
3102 bc and the Laukika era of 3076–5 bc,129 both of which are
mentioned in official records in the post-Gupta period.
The use of eras would also have had to do with the impact of a
culture given increasingly to literacy. The event that inaugurates
the Kaliyuga shifts from the date of Manu after the Flood, to the
last stage of the war, to the death of Kṛṣṇa.130 The parallel with the
date of the death of Mahāvīra and the Buddha as the basic era in
the Jaina and Buddhist historiography cannot go unnoticed. But
the date of the Kaliyuga is not the stable date from which eras are
calculated. These derive their identity from diverse events, the
most frequent being the most secular, namely the establishing of
a dynasty or a reign.
Time as a mahāyuga does not eliminate the past and the future,
since the cycle terminates in destruction and a new cycle follows.
The inordinate length of the cosmological time-cycle underlines
timelessness. The universe had a beginning in cosmological time
which is described as a generative factor. But the immensity of
the cycle virtually eliminates time. Within this are the four lesser
cycles, each of which does not return to its beginning but moves
into the next. The form is a spiral or a helix and this form, if
129 The Laukika era was particularly common in Kashmir and Punjab and
was also used in Rajasthan in the period towards the end of the first millen-
nium ad.
130 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 5.38.8.
Genealogies in the Making of a Historical Tradition 305
stretched, becomes a wave and even a not-too-straight line. But
simultaneously time measured by generations and therefore differ-
ent, and under human control, comes into historical reckoning. A
dis tinction is implicit between the history of the universe viewed
in infinity and human history subject to more exact measurement.
The latter was also linked in the meticulous measurement of time as
used in astrology, which centres on the past and future of the indi -
vidual.
In terms of eschatology, the Golden Age was in the remote past,
in the beginnings of time, after which there has been a steady
decline, from dharma to adharma. The link between time and
the moral condition is described in the social decline which will
prevail towards the latter part of the Kaliyuga. The rulers will be
of impure origin, and their subjects will be oppressed; the varṇa
ordering will be discarded and castes will move away from their
allotted functions. Vedic rites will not be observed and even the
brāhmaṇas will lose their code of ethics. Money will be the criter-
ion of status. Women will be liberated and will no longer obey
their husbands. Śūdras will take over upper-caste functions. The
need to labour will increase. People will live for fewer years. In
this almost Spenglerian vision it will indeed be a world turned
upside down. The change in the social condition becomes an
alleg ory of a sense of historical change. This would require that
those who ruled in earlier periods were of the appropriate social
status and are all clubbed together as kṣatriyas. The kṣatriya iden-
tity of these is a striking contrast to the non-kṣatriya identity of
most of the dynasties.
Degeneration over time is again an idea familiar from other
cultures. Hesiod speaks of the four ages as being of gold, silver,
bronze, and iron.131 The Avesta has a similar concept.132 In Budd-
hist and Jaina texts people will be forced to labour for the king
and this oppression lasts until the coming of the saviour figure.133
Written into cyclic time is of course the inevitable decline with
the downswing of the cycle.
The insistence on a dire condition in the Kaliyuga is difficult
131 Hesiod’s Theogony: Works and Days, 109–201.
132 R. Zaehner, The Dawn and Twilight of Zoroastrianism, 26.
133 Mahāsupina Jātaka, no. 77, in The Jataka; Jinaprabhāsūri, Vividhatīrtha­
kalpa, 14.
306 The Past Before Us
to ex plain since the time when the Purāṇas were being written
was when the Vaiṣṇava and Śaiva sects were beginning to attract
patronage and were becoming popular. However, Vedic Brah-
manism was threatened by the success of the Sramanic sects, the
Cārvāka/Lokāyata and such like, who were called heretics. Cults
such as those of the Śāktas were rivals for patronage. Although
hidden, the anxiety becomes apparent in some parts of the texts.
The notion of social decline is very useful and can be used
whenever necessary. Curiously, the reason often given for the
decline in the Puranic texts begins with a crisis in agriculture—
over-taxation, drought or torrential rain, famine, among other
things—and it is accompanied by the migration of the popula-
tion.134 There is no reference to peasant revolts in these texts but
only to migrations, perhaps because it was the more effective
method of registering protest.
The slow restoration to the Kṛta age will come about with the
arrival of Kalkin as the final avatāra of Viṣṇu. He will destroy
the mlecchas and the dasyus and proclaim the dharma once again.
This is a close parallel to the coming of the Buddha Maitreya.
The kṣatriya lineages will be restored through two kṣatriyas who
survive time and live through the yuga.
The creation of Kalkin may not have been only a counterpart
to the Buddha Maitreya. The early centuries ad was when many
figures emerged in the current religions as saviours whose pre-
dicted coming was to bring back utopian conditions. The idea had
currency in the areas that had close contact through trade—West
and Central Asia.135
10. An Interpretation
What are we to make of all this information? The theories of
racial identification do not hold because of contradictions within
the texts, apart from race now being a discredited concept. Pūru,
for example, whose “aryan” identity is doubtful since his speech
is mṛdhra vāc (impure language) and he is said to be descended
134 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 6.1.38.
135 R. Thapar, “Millenarianism and Religion in Early India”, in idem, Cultural
Pasts, 946–62.
Genealogies in the Making of a Historical Tradition 307
from the asura rākṣasa,136 is nevertheless given an eminent status
in the genealogies. Equally important were those descended from
Yadu, yet their status is also low in other texts: the Vṛṣṇis and the
Andhakas are referred to as vrātyas and the people of Saurāṣṭra,
associated with the Yadus, as belonging to mixed castes.137
The contradiction between the Purāṇas listing them as kṣatriyas
and rājās and other sources referring to their lower status, can
perhaps be resolved if the Puranic lists are only of those who
constituted the chiefs of clans. Irrespective of the caste ranking
given them by brāhmaṇa theoreticians, from the historical pers-
pective of the dynastic lists they were seen as societies with rājās
and were located within particular descent groups. The epics and
the Purāṇas appear to have been far more flexible in their social
formulations than the Dharmaśāstras. This may have been more
than just the contrast between accepted practice and normative
texts, and may have had to do with their initial authorship. The
authors of the former were bards and brāhmaṇas of rather ambi-
guous origin, whereas the authors of the Dharmaśāstras were
orthodox brāhmaṇas.
The differentiation between lineage-based society and king-
doms is clear in the differing patterns of succession and in the
chronological separation through the Flood and the war. The cons-
truction of the descent group set out the location, alliances, and
politics of clans as perceived from a later perspective. Inclusion
in a particular descent group was also a pointer to the kind of
political society associated with the clan. It is worth noting that a
number of motley clans is included under the Candravaṃśa but
not so in the Sūryavaṃśa.
The Viṣṇu Purāṇa states that the vaṃśānucarita section is a
brief account of all those who have ruled on earth, and the account
shows the futility of aspiring for extensive power or assuming
that one can be immortal. All is transient and passes, and this
includes the rulers of earlier times. The individual urge for pos-
session is meaningless since it cannot last. The text goes on to ask
rhetorically: What has happened to the heroes of old, Rāma and
136 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 6.8.1.14.
137 Baudhāyana Dharmasūtra, 1.1.2.13.
308 The Past Before Us
Yudhiṣṭhira among others. We do not know where they are now,
did they actually live?138 All present and future rulers are subject
to the same fate of being forgotten; unless, as is the assumption
here, only inclusion in the vaṃśānucarita can prevent that fate.
This would be an appropriate conclusion to a text purporting to
relate the list of the rulers of the past.
The Purāṇas have to keep pace with changes in every yuga,139
therefore a fixed tradition was not required (which incidentally
makes it difficult to date them). Their data makes them sources
for later writing. Their contents were not sacrosanct, as were
those of the Vedas, which perhaps encouraged a sense of histori-
cal change.
The gods and the sages are associated with the beginnings of
history. The founder of a descent group has a special relationship
with a deity that establishes his unique position and status. Built
into the function of kingship, with its exercise of power over
diverse communities, was the notion of the king’s patronage to
more than one sect. This may have been resented by brāhmaṇas
or by the Sramanic Saṅgha; nevertheless it was a political reality
commonly practised.
Descent from the founder has a noticeable pattern, differenti-
ated in the Candravaṃśa and the Sūryavaṃśa, and this presumes
a historical difference. The difference possibly points to variant
forms of political power and becomes both the source and the
expression of the legitimation of such power. Attempts to chart
the major kṣatriya clans after the Flood are also attempts to fill in
geographical space.
To name the lineages after the sun and the moon seems predict-
able, denoting permanence in the iconography of this period and
associated with calendrical time. Both the Solar and the Lunar
calendars were in use, but for different social functions: the agri-
cultural year or the ritual calendar. Their associations are often
contrasted: the sun is seen as the male symbol and the moon as the
female, endorsed by the ancestress Ilā at the head of the Lunar line.
Seniority may have been given to the Sūryavaṃśa, since Ikṣvāku
138 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 4.24.149.
139 Matsya Purāṇa, 53.8–9.
Genealogies in the Making of a Historical Tradition 309
is frequently mentioned as the eldest son of Manu and there is
some confusion over the gender of Ila. Taken more literally, the
sun outshines the moon. In Tantric and Yogic texts, the sun and the
moon symbolize the two main nerve centres to the right and the
left in the human body, and their unity is sought in certain Yogic
practices.140 There is mention of iḍā as the left vein and piṅgala
as the right vein. The taking over of such symbols reinforces the
interaction with Śākta and Tantric sects.
The sun and the moon, when referred to jointly in inscriptions,
often stand for eternity. A grant of land where it is irrevocable,
the hope is expressed that it will last as long as the moon and the
sun endure. As such they continue to be depicted for centuries on
hero-stones, commemorating dead heroes. As planets they host
the brilliance of sovereignty.
The recording of dynasties after the Kurukṣetra war indicates
a perception of difference in the nature of power in kingdoms.
The war is a watershed in the Puranic periodization of the past.
Whereas earlier all were included under the umbrella terms of rājā
or kṣatriya, now the social status of individual dynasties is given
separately, with ksatriyahood not being a prerequisite for king-
ship. The acquisition of power in itself confers rank. Therefore a
dynasty of Hellenistic origin, the Yavana, quite clearly mleccha,
is nevertheless described as vrātya kṣatriya (degenerate kṣatriya).
Dynastic succession is a pointer to the existence of states that take
precedence over non-state, clan-held territories. The eventual
establishment of the monarchical state involved a different set of ins -
titutions from those of preceding political forms, and therefore a
different basis of royal power.
If the relationship between descent groups was somewhat
opaque, that between dynasties is clear. Where a ruling family was
subordinate to the previous dynasty, it is described as the bhṛtya.
Overlordship is explicit. There are no lineage links connecting
dynasties, thus negating the importance of such links. However,
the links were within each dynasty with its shorter span than the
lineage. Political power seems to be a sufficient base for claiming
legitimacy. Claim to descent, if it was accepted, was sufficient: it
140 S.B. Das Gupta, Obscure Religious Cults, 235ff.
310 The Past Before Us
did not have to be represented as a biological fact. The claim was
important because a genealogy was the king’s legal title to rule.
An important and not unconnected statement towards the
end of the account of dynasties reads that a king of Magadha,
having overthrown the kṣatram, will create another kṣatram.141
This concedes that although the traditionally accepted kṣatriyas
had declined, it was still possible for there to be a new category of
kṣatriyas: a statement which has interesting consequences for the
future form of the itihāsa­purāṇa tradition. Implicit in this state-
ment is the fact that since nṛpah rather than kṣatriya frequently
qualifies dynasties, claims to being kṣatriya would seek links
with the Sūryavaṃśa or Candravaṃśa. The genealogical chapter
provided a peg on which to hang the status of the families who in
later times claimed to be kṣatriyas.
Interestingly, the list of other varṇas converted to kṣatriya status
through this new caste are the Kaivarta, Pañcaka, and Pulinda,
fisherfolk and barbarous peoples otherwise ranked as low castes
outside the pale of caste society. As a projection of the decline of
what was viewed as an earlier aristocracy, even if śūdra in caste,
and its replacement by newcomers and upstarts, the statement
could not be more explicit.
The statement seems to reflect the change in the polity of the
post-Gupta period, from about the seventh century onward, which
led to an increase in kingdoms. New claims were made to kṣatriya
status by families even of obscure origin. Where a brāhmaṇa reci-
pient of a land grant lurked in the ancestry, as was often the case,
there the likelihood could be of a brahma­kṣatra caste. This makes
an interesting counterpoint to the more than occasional statement
in the descent lists, where kṣatriyas are said to have been the found-
ers of brāhmaṇa varṇas, especially kṣatriyas of the Pūru lineage,
prior to Bharata. The interchange of kṣatriya and brāhmaṇa is
striking, suggesting grounds for accepting brāhmaṇa kings or
what the inscriptions refer to as brahma­kṣatra. The kṣatriyas are
also sometimes given brahma­kṣatra status.142
141 F.E. Pargiter, DKA, 53.
142 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 4.21.18: brahma kṣatrasya yo yonir vaṃśo rājaṛ­
ṣisatkṛtaḥ . . .
Genealogies in the Making of a Historical Tradition 311
This also raises the question of the changing connotation of
kṣatriya. The earlier function had been that of the heroic ideal
and eventually the king. Were dynasties listed as śūdra and non-
kṣatriya because they were patrons of non-brahmanical sects, such
as the Mauryan kings? Or should this be read as a statement that
those kings who could not or did not wish to trace their ancestry
to the clans were disapproved of by the brāhmaṇa authors? In
the claim to being kṣatriya, as reinvoked in the post-Gupta period
through assumed genealogical links, was royalty seeking sup -
port from brāhmaṇas for validation? Alternatively, the term as
applied to earlier rājās may have been used more in the sense of a
designation rather than as a caste, since not all that were so called
met the eligibility qualifications. The caste of some was distinctly
ambiguous. In later periods kṣatriya appears to have become more
closely a varṇa usage.
There is an element of uncertainty if not disjuncture towards
dynastic kingdoms in the vaṃśānucarita. This strikes a different
note from the endorsement of kingship, albeit as an ideal system
of government, in the later sections of the epics, as well as what
might be regarded as the exploitation of kingship in the texts to be
discussed in subsequent chapters. The vaṃśānucarita can perhaps
be seen as a watershed where, in the long perspective on the past,
the earlier kṣatriya rājās were viewed, from the brahmanical per-
spective, as the more prestigious and the later dynasties projected
largely as families of low origin or servitors.
There could even have been an initial distancing between Vedic
Brahmanism and the way kingship was evolving, because in effect,
during the course of this change, the political takes precedence
over the ritual as a significant articulation. The righting of this
condition in the literature was to come about when dynasties be-
gan to bestow largesse on the brāhmaṇas, often for validation as
kṣatriyas.
The full-throated endorsement of kingship in the Śānti parvan
of the epic may well have coincided with the initial attempts at
envisioning the vaṃśānucarita. Legitimacy now lay not just in
rituals but also in conquest, marriage alliances, and the establish-
ing of a caste-based society. The earlier prestation economy of
the kṣatriya rājās was at an end. It had been replaced by peasant
312 The Past Before Us
economies incorporating hereditary rights over land and by more
complex systems of exchange and trade. Nevertheless, the genero-
sity of kings was expressed in gift-giving to brāhmaṇas.
11. Historical Functions of Genealogies
The vaṃśānucarita as a chapter on succession is an attempt at
giving an overview of the past, the Puranic view of pre-Gupta his-
tory. The historical perspectives are expressed in the genealogical
patterns. The data is taken from the Vedic corpus and the epics
but is reformulated as a continuous narrative in a genealogical
form. This became a substantial source in the post-Gupta period
for constructing links between dynasties and the earlier lineages,
as is evident particularly in inscriptions.
The possibility of there having been a distinctive kṣatriya tradi-
tion has been debated.143 This would not be altogether surprising,
given the emergence of caste Purāṇas in many sections of Indian
society seeking to provide a history and a status for their caste.
Without going over the old debate again,144 it does seem possible
that, similar to the succession lists of teachers maintained by
brāhmaṇas, some kṣatriya succession lists, such as those in the
epics, were maintained by bards. These may well have been taken
over by brāhmaṇa authors and reconstituted, together with later
material, into the vaṃśānucarita in the Purāṇas.
The potential of a believed past as recognized by brāhmaṇa
authors goes back to mention of itihāsa and purāṇa in Vedic texts.
But giving distinctive form to the tradition was a later develop-
ment. The Bhṛgu and Aṅgirasa brāhmaṇas hovering over the
tra dition could have bridged the difference. The Purāṇas can per -
haps be seen as an attempt to appropriate some of the legitimacy of
Vedic Brahmanism, while at the same time drawing on a tradition
from non-brahmanical sources. Thus, the history of those claiming
political power was being embedded in the form of a vaṃśa.
There was the added parallel that dynasties patronizing brah-
manical sects such as the Guptas could be projected in a favour-
able light, whereas those who were not patrons were described in
143 F.E. Pargiter, “Ancient Indian Genealogies and Chronology”, 1–56.
144 L. Rocher, The Puranas, 125–9.
Genealogies in the Making of a Historical Tradition 313
unflattering terms, if at all. The inclusion of historical succession
in sectarian texts was a common practice wherever the sect had
some links with rulers, as is evident from Buddhist histories per-
taining to monasteries and the Saṅgha. Initially, the record of the
vaṃśa or succession would have been orally maintained, hence
the possibility of restructuring it at some point. When compiled
as texts, the brahmanical worldview would have been influential,
especially in countering heterodox teaching.
The Vaiṣṇava sects, in endorsing the assimilation of selected
cultures, assisted in the emergence of states and the change from
clan to caste. This was helpful to the ideological justification of
social inequalities, as also the vesting of power in kings, who
were increasingly compared with deities but from whom they
were predictably differentiated. The sectarian teaching became
more universalized when it was in textual form. The recitations
by paurāṇikas in temples and at gatherings on special occasions
were opportunities to address a wide audience. The inclusion of a
genealogical section (if it was also recited) meant that it was open
to more people than through bardic recitals alone. The genealogi-
cal mode was more than just a list of succession when seen as a
historical statement.
Why did the brāhmaṇas eventually take over this tradition? And
why does this come to be associated particularly, but not invari-
ably, with the Bhṛgus? At an obvious level, this may not have been
unconnected with literacy. The transmission of the Purāṇas, in a
literate form, made them texts for reference. Although they could
be recited on ritual occasions, or even as an act of acquiring merit,
a more developed historical sensibility required written records.
Writing introduces changes in the transmission of that which is
believed to be significant to a culture. However, the form which
writing takes and the degree to which it is diffused in society
influences historical sensibility. Further, although an account can
be changed, such change can be less radical in a written than an
oral form.
However, the more significant reason has to do with the func-
tion of a historical perspective. The historical tradition becomes
an instrument of social control and is maintained by a specific
category of people whose power derives from their ability to
prov ide those in authority with an identity. A historical tradition
314 The Past Before Us
therefore establishes group consciousness. As a person recording
the past, or transmitting the past in an oral or literate form, the
historian is an informant. Gradually, however, as his control over
the past increases, he acquires a perspective and takes on the role
of a participant as well, although not literally.
The need for a historical perspective probably had much to do
with the challenge from the histories being written by Sramanic
sects. Buddhism had its version of clan societies, and kingdoms
dominated by a historical figure. The brāhmaṇa version of this
was a deity, Viṣṇu, in the guise of a hero attempting to do the same.
But this was less effective as history. The challenge was intensified
by having to acquire an identity in a new historical situation, and
when history came to be recorded in inscriptions. The contradic-
tions between brāhmaṇa and Buddhist authors become apparent
if the Yuga Purāṇa is compared with the Milinda-pañho, both
virtually contemporary works.145 The first condemns the Yavanas
as alien whereas the second is an attempt at persuading a Yavana
king to become a Buddhist.
It may also be argued that the way in which the notion of
deity as an element of kingship—although rooted in Vedic notions
of deity and power—was developed may have been part of the
competition with Buddhism. The close identity of king and deity is
evident in Manu.146 The form it takes differs from the way Aśoka,
for instance, marginalized deities as part of social functioning. The
question has been asked whether the aitihāsika paurāṇikas were
the ones to develop the idea of the divine king in the form it was
to take in the mid-first millennium ad.147 The major aitihāsika
paurāṇikas could have been linked to Bhṛgu brāhmaṇas.
Association with political power was recognized as a method
of enhancing the authority of other groups. This association was
assisted by providing a history for the rulers which could gradually
replace rituals as a source of legitimation. The opening up of new
145 J. Mitchiner, Yuga Purāṇa; Milinda-pañho.
146 Manu’s Code of Law, 7.1–35.
147 M. Tokunaga, “Structure of the Rājadharma Section in the Yājñavalkya­
smṛti”.
Genealogies in the Making of a Historical Tradition 315
areas with consequent settlements became a feature of the political
economy from the Gupta period. This would have required some
historical back-up in providing identity to the new rulers.
If we decode the vaṃśānucarita as a perception of the past, a
number of patterns emerge. The past is set out in distinct periods,
with the consciousness of a change in the historical context as the
causative factor of difference. Implicit in the pattern is the shift, in
many instances, from clan to caste. Varṇa or jāti are not noticeable
identities of the kṣatriya heroes, for even kṣatriya seems to have a
different connotation initially from that of only varṇa ranking. But
varṇa is specifically mentioned in association with the dynasties.
This is parallel to some degree with the mutation of non-state
systems to states taking the form of kingdoms. The perception
of who could legitimately acquire power and how is distinctly
different in the third period from the second. This is now a more
impersonal act. It not only does not require kinship links between
one dynasty and another, but successors sometimes emerge from
situations of disjunction. The association of this perception with
the Viṣṇu and Matsya Purāṇas raises the question of the extent to
which Vaiṣṇavism was an assimilative ideology and Bhāgavatism
played a role in the mutation.
The vaṃśānucarita becomes a ready reference for later use.
Legitimation through genealogical connections is reflected in ins-
criptions and chronicles. Claims are made to Sūryavaṃśa and
Candravaṃśa origins, or to other invented “vaṃśas”. Such claims
become necessary to those of obscure origin for establishing sta-
tus, providing a presumed history and arranging marriage alliances
with established families already having claimed kṣatriya status.
It points to the implementation of the varṇāśrama­dharma as a
somewhat different stratification from what had existed before.
The focus shifts to courts and to the new feature of the wor-
ship of Puranic deities in temples. The king had to maintain those
who were the source of his legitimacy—generally the brāhmaṇas
propagating Puranic Hinduism and forging worship in the temples.
A closeness to kingly authority required the appropriation of the
authorship of the tradition, with the texts of the tradition becoming
essential to the new form of royal legitimation, and the claims of
316 The Past Before Us
the latter to particular pasts. They could dictate the content and
form of the records pertaining to the past. Texts could also be
copied and multiplied and gifted to brāhmaṇas.148 Special readings
were held, and since these were open to śūdras and women, the
audience was large. The paurāṇika who read them is also called
itihāsa-vid. This doubtless would have increased the tension be-
tween brāhmaṇa and bard.
The tension would have stretched to that between the oral tradi-
tion and texts. Where the historical process uses both, it emerges
from an accommodation and negotiation between the two. The nar-
ratives of the Purāṇas are often reported narratives—composed
by Brahmā, taught by Vyāsa, recited by the sūta; but each has a
written text to back it up, as it were.149 Narratives from the past,
therefore, are not random. The narrators are aware of their role in
transmitting a process that has the implications of being historical
and linking the past to the present. The mode of discourse is not
altogether arbitrary: it has some coherence in terms of continuity
and a larger than local outlook.150
Why did the vaṃśānucarita stop with the Guptas? This was
probably the point at which it was composed and, the third segment
being in the future tense, it could not be continued. Dynastic suc-
cession was now beginning to be recorded in inscriptions issued by
rulers, who most likely used the vaṃśānucarita as a source. New
genres of texts were to emerge from the royal courts, such as the
caritas (biographies of kings and ministers), and the vaṃśāvalīs
(chronicles). The Purāṇas became more central as religious sec-
tarian texts. As such they parallel the Buddhist avadāna literature,
where each text focused on one person or on an arahant, and it
was the literature of propagation.
The emergence of itihāsa from out of an embedded tradition, at
a particular period of time, requires us to look more closely at that
point in time. Constructing the past is a normal activity in most
societies, as are changes in these constructions from earlier to later
periods. This process is necessitated by new political forms, such
148 Agni Purāṇa, 63.13–20.
149 V. Narayana Rao, “Purāṇa as Brahminic Ideology”, 90ff.
150 F. Hardy, “Information and Transformation—Two Faces of the Purāṇas”,
159–85.
Genealogies in the Making of a Historical Tradition 317
as, in this case, the uprooting of chiefdoms in favour of kingdoms
(the proud boast of Samudra Gupta); changes in the structure of
the economy that sustained kingdoms, resulting in a decentral-
ization in the control of economic resources despite the revenue
that accrued to the king; the mutation of clans into castes where
this happened; the political requirement of assimilating outsiders
into what was normatively projected as a closed social structure;
and the confrontation between Vedic and non-Vedic ideologies
that eventually resulted in Puranic Hinduism superseding Vedic
Brahmanism as the religion of a larger number.
The genealogical material could be used to identify groups and
provide them with historical antecedents. But the genealogies were
more crucial to political functions and to the status and accept-
ability of office-holders.151 The perception of the past is expressed
in the association of places of origin, links with lineages, and the
counting of generations. Newcomers are grafted on or segments
detached. The genealogy therefore becomes a useful historical
and political tool. This necessitates that those who keep the genea-
logical tradition are aware of their closeness to political power.152
Genealogy was among the king’s legal titles to rule.
In the composition of the vaṃśānucarita an attempt was made
to reconstruct a past, constituted for a purpose. Was this perhaps
to establish a brahmanical version of the past, distinct from that
put together in other traditions such as the Buddhist or Jaina,
traditions that were seen as rivals to the brahmanical Purāṇas?
The oral tradition of the bards was incorporated in this version.
Yet the bards were not banished at this point, for the bard often
foretells the narrative of dynasties. Nevertheless, the perspective
endorses neither the bardic view nor the Sramanic.
Constructing a view of the past doubtless arose from the re-
cog nition that religious authority is assisted by association with
political power—as demonstrated in the establishing of Buddh -
ism. One of the strengths of such an association lay in controlling
the construction of the past. The taking over of the tradition by the
brāhmaṇas was to ensure that this construction was perceived as
important to contemporary politics. The genealogical section drew
151 M.D. Johnson, The Purpose of Biblical Genealogies, 77–82.
152 D. Dumville, “Kingship, Genealogies and Regnal Lists”, 72–104.
318 The Past Before Us
attention to data, and to the structure facilitating the legitimacy of
ruling families. The ideological location of this construction was
in the texts of the new Puranic religions which were the recipients
of royal patronage. This was not only a counterpoint to Buddhism
in a period when Puranic sects were making a bid to compete with
Buddhism in seeking support, but it also encouraged the notion of
the interface of political power with religious authority.
If situations of competition or confrontation increase sensiti­
vity to historical perceptions, then this would be expected in the
mid-first millennium ad. In the competition between Buddhism,
the Śaiva sects, and the Bhāgavata religion, the Gupta dynasty,
being supporters of the latter, would have been regarded as ap­
propriate patrons. A past would then be constructed in which there
would be a claim to historicity. Even if not factually historical, this
claim took the form of genealogies as a summary of the histori­
cal past. Genealogies therefore become important at particular
points in time, demonstrating their importance by increasing in
frequency.
As a construction of the past, this section of the Purāṇas en­
capsulated a consciousness of history and was used as such, being
elaborated upon in the subsequent period. The forms, however,
changed from the bare bones of a genealogical skeleton to the far
fuller forms of inscriptions, biographies, and chronicles.
Table IV
Historical Change Suggested in the Vaṃśānucarita
III. The Seven Manus—from Svayambhu to Vaivasvat, ruling for
extraordinarily long periods, suggesting mythical time
The Flood as a time­marker
III. Kṣatriya lineages:
Sūryavaṃśa: from Ikṣvāku to Rāma
Candravaṃśa: from Ilā to the Pāṇḍavas
The Kurukṣetra war as the time-marker
III. Sequential order of dynasties with lists of rulers and
regnal years: initially of Magadha but soon after of northern India
7
Early Inscriptions as
Historical Statements
(Up to c. the Sixth Century )
ad
1. The Data
Among the documents that record events and refer to the
past, the more reliable are thought to be inscriptions.
They generally reflect the views of those in authority, are
located in public places, and are addressed to subjects of the state.
This probably requires them to be more accurate in what they are
saying, although this requirement is not always met. They can also
be the statements of less-well-established groups. Early inscrip-
tions tend to be fragments of historical information, and this is
the manner in which they have been used. But inscriptions also
assume some sensitivity to historical consciousness expressed in
a variety of ways, which is what is assumed here. Inscriptions as
annals date to a later period.
As textual records, inscriptions have varying functions, re-
quiring diverse languages, and spoken by different people. In
nineteenth-century India they were listed under archaeology
because they were engraved on an object and came to be treated
as artifacts. The texts were sieved for data on dynastic succession
and chronology. A century later they were recognized as impor-
tant documents providing information on society and economy.
Their extensive information on grants of land has been discussed
320 The Past Before Us
at length in the last few decades, leading to an incisive debate on
whether or not the post-Gupta period saw the establishing of a
feudal society. Here, I would like to give them additional recogni-
tion in relation to the study of historical writing.
The early inscriptions reflect an awareness of a past linked to
the present in a historical manner. This is a departure from the
ambiguities of the epics and Purāṇas. On occasion, inscriptions
confirm what may be stated in a text, but they also provide a paral-
lel text. In a marginal way they are artifacts and can be examined
as material culture, but in effect they are texts and should be
regarded as such. Considering that a major part of the history of
India prior to c. ad 1000 comes from inscriptions, it is surprising
that they have so seldom been studied as documents providing a
sense of history.1
Inscriptions in early India are of many kinds: royal edicts,
votive inscriptions recording gifts, brief biographical statements,
eulogies of rulers, records of particular events, legal documents
pertaining to rights and obligations over land, and suchlike. As
with all categories of historical data, they reflect historical change.
The context of a text involves asking many questions, such as:
Who is the author? What is the intention of the text? Who is the
intended audience? How does the language reflect history? Where
there is a change of language, what determines the choice? The
same questions can be asked of inscriptions.
The earliest forms of writing were the Harappan signs, en-
graved in the main on small seals found in abundance mostly at
the city sites.2 These were discontinued with the decline of cities.
This disjuncture suggests a language change in north-western
India. Whatever the Harappan language may have been, the suc-
cessor languages as recorded were predominantly Indo-Aryan in
that area.
Language change is not an isolated phenomenon but is tied to
other historical events. Who uses which language and for what
purposes is basic to understanding societies of the past, since
1 D.C. Sircar, Early Indian Epigraphical and Numismatic Studies, 91; R.
Salomon, Indian Epigraphy, 226–32.
2 A. Parpola, Deciphering the Indus Script.
Early Inscriptions as Historical Statements 321
there was no uniform use of a single language. This is interest-
ingly reflected in early Indian inscriptions. Those up to the early
Christian era are exclusively in Prākrit (a widely used and varied
vernacular form of Old Indo-Aryan), although Sanskrit was simul-
taneously being used for other purposes, such as in Vedic rituals.
Later, at the turn to the first millennium ad, Sanskrit came into use
in inscriptions, coinciding with it becoming the court language,
although Prākrit remained a commonly used language.3
Scripts also evolved and changed over time. Initially, two were
used for writing Prākrit: brāhmī, which was widespread and had
some similarities with the southern Semitic script; and kharoṣṭhī,
derived from Aramaic, current in Achaemenid Iran, which was
limited to north-western India and Central Asia; the use of this
gradually declined. Brāhmī remained the primary script and gave
rise to others. Modifications of the script became marked after the
mid-first millennium ad. This was in part due to adaptations to
emerging regional languages. The brāhmī script evolved to the
point where it gradually became impossible to read the earliest
inscriptions.
In the late nineteenth century many inscriptions began to be
read and variations in the script were recognized. Since many were
dated, the focus was on obtaining a reliable chronology. Mention
of the ruling king made it possible to reconstruct dynastic history.
This was especially so of the period subsequent to the Guptas,
when the Purāṇas ceased to carry dynastic information, but a
substantial increase in inscriptions compensated for this. The
growing awareness of there being sources of power other than
ritual is evident from the deliberate drawing on the past and us-
ing it to legitimize the present. This was to become an important
aspect of the data in inscriptions, quite apart from their informa-
tion on the present.
Early authors of inscriptions varied, but generally conformed to
either of two categories: the monks, nuns, and householders who
wished to record the bare essentials of their gift to the monastery
or stūpa; or scribes to whom the king dictated the text of his
statement and who would in turn pass the text on to the engraver.
3 R. Salomon, Indian Epigraphy; A.H. Dani, Indian Palaeography.
322 The Past Before Us
Chitral Gilgit
Hindu Ku
M
s
a
h
nsehra
K a ra
k o
ra
G m
Kabul
R
e
GANDHĀ
Jh
R
elu
A
m Chenab
E
A
B
T
ea s H
Indus
a
n g Ravi IM
A
m a
n
R
Sutlej KURU
LAYA
R A N G E
Sulai
DELHI
Yam
una
G
anga
dus Mathura Piprahwa
nI
Chambal
Ganga
Sarnath Pā.taliputra
Andau Son
GUJARAT U
V
jj
i
a
n
in dhya
Range
KOLKATA
Girnar Narmada
Tapi Mahanad N (cid:115) i G A Dhauli
Nasik A
LI
K Khandagiri
Hathigumpha
Caves
MUMBAI
Bhima G odavari
Krishna
Tungabhadra
Yerragudi Bha
A
tt
m
ip
a
r
r
o
ā
lu
vati
Nāgārjunakonda
0 200
North
Pennar
Kilometres CHENNAI
Kaveri
Map 4, Chapter 7
Map 4: Locations of the More Important Places, Clans, and Dynasties
Early Inscriptions as Historical Statements 323
Inscriptions tend to be explicit about the source of their authority.
The audience for the first category was substantially the common
people who either visited the Buddhist site or who read or heard
what the king and others had to say. The audience for the royal
inscriptions would have included the royal court. Compared to
texts, the inscriptions have a wider reach. Royal inscriptions,
therefore, are mostly statements on governance or, more often,
grants, but other aspects of life also get recorded.
Inscriptions were recorded on varied surfaces according to
their function. The earliest were royal edicts, engraved on rock
faces in locations where people gathered. Subsequently, these
edicts were engraved on monolithic pillars with finely sculpted
capitals. Inscribing royal edicts came to be seen as significant to
governance.
Almost parallel to this were votive inscriptions, initially found
at stūpa sites. Small caskets or vases containing post-cremation
relics were frequently placed at the base of the central shaft of
the stūpa. The lid of these would be inscribed, explaining the con-
tents. Votive inscriptions were engraved on the exterior surface of
the stūpa or the railings, the donation being a contribution to its
construction. The assumption of literacy and the need to record
the action is impressive.
A third category was the copper-plate inscriptions generally
recording grants of land. The grant was inscribed on two or more
hand-sized plates of copper, held together by a ring which passed
through a hole on one side. The idea may have been an imitation
of birch-bark and palm-leaf manuscripts held together by stringing
the leaves. These are late inscriptions dating to the centuries ad.
2. The Inscriptions of Aśoka
The earliest deciphered inscriptions are the edicts of the Mauryan
emperor Aśoka dating to the third century bc.4 These edicts, as
royal proclamations, are in three languages—Prākrit, Greek, and
4 E. Hultzsch, Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, vol. I; J. Bloch, Les Inscrip-
tions d’Asoka; R. Thapar, Aśoka and the Decline of the Mauryas, 271–5; H. Falk,
Aśokan Sites and Artifacts.
324 The Past Before Us
Aramaic; and four scripts—brāhmī, kharoṣṭhī, Greek, and Ara-
maic. The largest number is in Prākrit, with locations all over the
subcontinent. The Greek and Aramaic inscriptions are located
in Afghanistan, in the area ceded to the Mauryas by Seleucus
Nicator.
The conversational tone of the edicts would have been inap-
propriate in Sanskrit since the audience would have been largely
Prākrit-speaking. This is made apparent by the king mentioning
that his officers were to read the edicts wherever people gathered
and wished to hear what he had said. There were areas where lit-
eracy was not sufficient among people to read the edicts, although
literacy in Prākrit among state officials, Buddhist monks, traders,
and some others is attested to. Regional differences of dialect point
to the language being widely spoken. Probably the edicts were
sent out in Māgadhi Prākrit, current in the capital at Pāṭaliputra,
and local scribes and engravers introduced local dialect usage.
One of the interesting variations is that in Māgadhi, the “r” is
replaced by “l”. Thus rājā is written as lājā. This replacement has
a long history. It is mentioned in the Vedic corpus five centuries
earlier as characteristic of the speech of the asuras, the mlec-
chas, barbarians who cannot speak Sanskrit correctly.5 From the
orthodox Sanskritic perspective the language used by the emperor
Aśoka was that of people outside the social pale.
The Aśokan edicts written in Aramaic had incorporated some
elements of Prākrit, reflecting the presence of Prākrit speakers
in that area. An Aśokan bilingual Aramaic-Greek inscription
indicates the presence of a Greek-speaking population, which is
further endorsed by translations of the Major Rock Edicts from
Prākrit into Greek. These become epigraphic cross-references to
events in Hellenistic West Asia, made more firm by the mention
in one edict of five Hellenistic kings who were contemporaries of
Aśoka.6 The type of Greek used was generally the koine, which
was the lingua franca of the Hellenistic world, registering regional
variation, and it therefore parallels the use of Prākrit in India. The
variants used in the languages become historical statements.
5 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 3.2.1.23.
6 MRE XIII, in R. Thapar, Aśoka and the Decline of the Mauryas, 40ff.
Early Inscriptions as Historical Statements 325
The five Hellenistic kings are mentioned as:
atta aṃtiyoge nāma yonalā [ja] palaṃ cā tenā aṃtiyogenā cattalī
4 lājane tulamaye nāma aṇtekine nāma makā nāma alikyaṣudale
nāma . . .7
[. . . where reigns the Yona king named Antiochus and beyond
that Antiochus four kings named Ptolemy, Antigonus, Magas, and
Alexander . . .]
This reference to the yonarājās has come to be the bedrock
of ancient Indian chronology because the dates of these kings
as contemporaries of Aśoka are well established. The certainty
of this evidence supersedes the equating of Sandrocottos with
Candragupta Maurya—which was suggested by William Jones.
The keystone of chronology comes from inscriptional evidence,
which gave a firm base to historical reconstruction.
What is remarkable about these edicts is that the king touches
on many facets of Indian life and history that had been and were
being acted upon in later centuries. Without saying so directly,
there was much that later had its genesis in these ideas. In more
senses than one, the edicts can be regarded as an introduction to
the historical traditions of early India. There are references to
ideas and actions as they prevailed in the past and the manner in
which they were now being changed, and why.
A historical document of great significance is the inscription
identifying the birthplace of the Buddha at Lumbini.8 The most
expansive of the inscriptions are the Major Rock Edicts and the
Pillar Edicts which are in effect the statements of a cakkavatti,
a universal monarch discoursing on the code of social ethics or
dhamma that he wishes his subjects to follow. He does not call
himself a cakkavatti but he acts as one. The edicts are partly auto-
biographical, articulating his thoughts and activities, reflecting on
awareness of royal functions in past times in the light of contem-
porary concerns, and the relevance to posterity of what he says.
This gives the edicts a flavour of historical consciousness.
7 J. Bloch, Les Inscriptions d’Asoka, 130; R. Thapar, Aśoka and the Decline
of the Mauryas, 40–1.
8 J. Bloch, Les Inscriptions d’Asoka, 157.
326 The Past Before Us
Aśoka’s edicts fall into two categories. The smaller in number is
addressed to the Buddhist Saṅgha and focuses on matters pertain-
ing to the activities of the Saṅgha. For instance, in one of these he
specifies the teachings of the Buddha that the monks should know.
He does not refer to these as parts of the Canon, thus suggesting
that it may have been unfamiliar in the form we know it. The larger
category of edicts is mainly that of the Rock and Pillar Edicts,
apart from various small edicts. The Major Rock Edicts were
issued after his twelfth regnal year (dbādasa vāssābhisittena).9
Another set of edicts was issued, after his twenty-sixth regnal
year, this time on pillars, some in situ and some specially erected
at important locations in the Ganges plains. These latter are a
retrospective, reviewing what he has achieved and commenting
on his earlier actions. They emphasize social ethics as defined by
Aśoka in his explanation of dhamma, and, although not identical
with Buddhist teaching, were nevertheless in dialogue with it.
They do not limit themselves to endorsing Buddhist teaching but
incorporate the ethics of tolerance relating to diverse views, as
well as the nurturing of wide social relationships.
The distinction between the two is also evident from the smaller
number of the first category being located at specifically Buddhist
sites, since they were addressed to the Saṅgha, and the larger
number of the second category being located more often at places
where people congregated, but which were generally not places of
pilgrimage for Buddhists in the Mauryan period. In the Buddhist
historiographical tradition, however, as we shall see, Aśoka came
to be projected as the royal patron par excellence of the Buddhist
Saṅgha and the doctrine. The authors of the tradition either did not
read the edicts, or could not do so with the brāhmī script having
changed, or chose to ignore them.
The Aśokan inscriptions usher in a pattern of correlating events
to regnal years, thereby underlining a sharper chronological focus.
Regnal years are also indicative of linear time. Frequent mention is
made of past times (purā) or, more specifically, in times past many
years ago (atikkātam aṃtaram bahūni vāssastāni), when kings
indulged in pleasures that have now declined (MRE I, IV, VIII).
The penchant for hunting among previous kings has been replaced
9 MRE III, ibid., 95.
Early Inscriptions as Historical Statements 327
by his missions teaching ethics and speaking of dhamma. Where
once there was no presence of the gods, they now mingle with the
people. Some activities however are to continue until the end of
the kalpa, the existence of the universe (samvaṭṭa kappā).
Aśoka refers to his domain as vijaye—that over which he
rules (MRE XIV). Friendly references are made to his western
neighbours, the five Hellenistic kings (MRE XIII), and to vari-
ous peoples within the imperial territories: the Yonas, Kāmbojas,
Nābhakas, Nābhapaṅktis, Bhojas, Pitinikas, Andhras, and Pārindas;
and in the South the Cholas, Pāṇḍyas, Keralaputras, and Satyapu-
tras. These latter references, in contrast to those pertaining to the
Hellenistic rulers, contain no names of kings, and the suffix putra
is often used for a clan. This may explain why the region was not
treated on par with the Hellenistic kingdoms.
Mention is also made of the forest peoples—the aṭavikas. It is
said that the king is like their father and feels for them and that
they will be forgiven by the king in so far as they can be forgiven.
But what they are to be forgiven for is not stated and the threats
seem uncalled for (SE II). Presumably, forest-dwellers were
resisting the encroachment into forests by kingdoms desirous of
cutting down forests and converting them into cultivable land in
order to establish new settlements and enhance revenue. This is
implied in some of the remarks on forest tribes in the Arthaśāstra,
the text on political economy, a part of which is thought to be of
this period.10 Forest produce included flora, fauna, and mineral
wealth, and had to be strictly guarded against private exploita-
tion. The confrontation between the state and forest-dwellers was
constant, resolved either by the latter ceasing to be clan entities
and becoming law-abiding peasants with caste identities, which
meant changing their way of life or, alternatively, by some of them
moving deeper into the recesses of the forest.
3. Inscriptions Recording Royal Statements
Post-Mauryan inscriptions provided information on rulers and on
events associated with them, either through a direct reference or
indirectly. Others referred back to earlier kings and their activities.
10 Arthaśāstra, 2.17.
328 The Past Before Us
Some of this information came to be included in the praśasti sec-
tion— the eulogy or panegyric on the king and dynasty—which
became a normal preliminary in the format of certain inscriptions,
and in the royal seals of some dynasties. Yet others on occasion
used the site of a previous inscription for adding further inscrip-
tions, the whole being regarded as historically important.
Prākrit was widely used for almost four centuries from the Mau-
ryan period. Dynasties of the immediately post-Mauryan period
issued inscriptions in Prākrit. Coin legends of the Sātavāhanas,
Indo-Greeks, and Indo-Scythians used other languages as well,
such as Greek in the north-west. This is not surprising at a time
when trade was in the ascendant, encouraging bilingualism. Royal
inscriptions recorded donations to Buddhist monasteries and
brāhmaṇas. The inscription was a statement of status as well as
the record of a pious gift. For example, grants recorded at Nasik
include a substantial investment by a member of the Kṣatrapa
royal family in two weavers’ guilds, the interest of which was to
be used in diverse ways: for purchasing robes for monks;11 for
planting 32,000 coconut trees for a congregation of monks; and
for making lavish donations to brāhmaṇas, including providing
some with wives.12
An innovation in royal inscriptions was the inclusion of a brief
biography of a ruler in an inscription from western India, and in
another a somewhat longer autobiographical statement from a king
of Kaliṅga in the east, both issued at about the same time. Gotami
Balasiri, a Sātavāhana queen, refers to the achievements of her
son Siri Sātakaṇi Gotamiputa.13 The reigning king took the title
of Vāsiṭhiputa Siri Pulumāyi.14 Whereas he is referred to as raño,
Gotamiputa is given the title of rājaraño—king of kings—later
11 Ep. Ind., 8, no. 12, 82ff.
12 Ibid., no. 10, 78ff.
13 Ibid., no. 2, 60ff.
14 Vāsiṭhiputa is the Prākrit for the Sanskrit Vāsiṣṭhīputra. The other name,
Pulumāyi, does not appear to be of Indo-Aryan origin. The use of bilingual
coins in Tamil and Prākrit by the Sātavāhanas would suggest some component
of Dravidian speakers. A possible Dravidian etymology could be puliñan or
puliyan (forest-dwellers or mountaineers; DED 3547, 3548) and may also have
provided the root for the Sanskrit name Pulinda, referring to such people.
Early Inscriptions as Historical Statements 329
to take the form of mahārājādhirāja. Gotamiputa is said to have
revived the glory of the Sātavāhana dynasty—sātavāhana-kula-
yasapatithāpana—by defeating the Yavanas and rooting out the
Khakharāta clans. He also stopped the contamination of the four
varṇas, as required by the orthodox brahmanical social code, a
phrase that had become more politically formulaic than reflec-
tive of actual social observance. This inscription anticipates the
praśastis of later inscriptions and also carries the seminal notions
of what were to develop as biographies of kings.
Conquests and the protection of caste society were to be re-
quirements of kingship. Nevertheless, it is also on record—and
was often to be so—that the royal patron supported the Saṅgha,
a link which was to be emphasized in the Buddhist historical tra-
dition. Gifts and grants, given separately to śramaṇa (Buddhist
and Jaina) and to brāhmaṇa grantees, were a common practice
and remained so until grants to Buddhist and Jaina recipients
declined.
Another prototype of the praśasti is the unusual Hathigumpha
inscription from Orissa, a brief autobiography of Khāravela, the
Cedi ruler of Kaliṅga, dating to the first century bc.15 It is virtually
a year-by-year account of his achievements in early life. The loca-
tion of the inscription near a Jaina centre was perhaps because the
king was a Jaina. Khāravela refers to conflict with the Sātavāhanas
over territory in the Deccan. He also refers to the Yavana-rājā
Dimita—probably the Indo-Greek king Demetrios, whose pres-
ence in Central India is mentioned in other sources, and who refers
to himself in his coins as Dime[tra] in Prākrit. Other conflicts in-
cluded campaigns against the kingdoms of South India, and closer
home against those of the middle Ganges plain.16 He takes an inter-
est in the compiling of Jaina texts, doubtless on the model of what
was being done in the Buddhist monasteries at the time, and which
was to give rise to a distinctive historical tradition. Khāravela’s
reference to holding an assembly of ascetics and monks coming
from every direction, to describing himself among other things
15 Ep. Ind., 20, 71ff.
16 D.C. Sircar, “Problems of the Yuga Purāṇa”, in idem, Studies in Yugapurāṇa
and Other Texts, 1–19.
330 The Past Before Us
as bhikkhu-rājā, dhama-rājā (the rājā of monks and of dharma),
and to his revering all sects—sava-pāsaṃḍa-pūjako—suggests
an attempt to emulate the actions of Aśoka Maurya, of which he
would have known from his edicts and from Buddhist texts. Most
of the place names that he mentions have been identified.
The Hathigumpha inscription introduces features that were to
become characteristic of inscriptions in the later period. In speak-
ing of his origins he refers to himself as airena which, as ailena,
could mean the descendant of Ila/Ilā, a lineage ancestor/ancestress
of the Candravaṃśa from the Puranic tradition. He identifies his
own lineage as that of the Mahāmeghavāhana, which in the Jaina
tradition is particularly illustrious.17 He claims links to the Cedi
descent group, as do a number of dynasties of this region, such as
the Kalacuri and the Haihaya. The title kaliṅgādhipati makes him
the lord of Kaliṅga, of substantial importance in eastern India.
A group of brief inscriptions in the Manchapuri cave (Khanda-
giri in Orissa) contain references to the cave of (presumably
donated by) the mahārāja Kaliṅgādhipati Mahāmeghavāhana.18
The Mahāmeghavāhana seems to have been the lineage ruling
in Kaliṇga at this time. The literal meaning of mahāmegha, the
great cloud and vehicle, hints at the story of the Cedis to whom
this lineage was linked and who used a flying chariot (a great
cloud?) to traverse the skies! His claim to a Cedi connection marks
a significant historiographical point. The Cedis were one of the
sixteen major states of northern India in Buddhist sources. In the
genealogical lists of the Purāṇas, as we have seen, they are said to
belong to the wider Yadu lineage. But Khāravela’s claim doubtless
comes from Jaina sources, and may be prior to the construction
of descent groups in the Purāṇas. The comparison of Khāravela
to Vena is also of interest since Vena was opposed to brahmanical
orthodoxy. Mention of the Raṭhika and the Bhoja evokes Aśokan
inscriptions. The reference to the Nandas of Magadha is to the
pre-Mauryan dynasty, here said to have constructed a water-
course in Kaliṅga, dated to ti-vasa-sata—read as either the year
17 This is evident from the Paumacariyam, the Jaina version of the Rāma-
kathā. See Chapter 5 above.
18 Ep. Ind., 13, 160.
Early Inscriptions as Historical Statements 331
103 of a Nanda era (?), or 300 years from the Nandas. Khāravela
is anxious to make connections with earlier rulers and events, in
an assertion of authority.
Autobiographical statements such as that of Khāravela are
rare, as also are pen-portraits of rulers until later times. Even
portraiture does not seem to have been particularly fashionable.
Occasionally, when earlier rulers are depicted in sculpture, the
intention is not to make a portrait or represent the person through
a recognizable likeness. The identity is established through a label
giving the name. Thus rāyā asoko is represented on two panels at
the stūpa in Kanaganahalli, and the two portrayals are not identi-
cal. The figures are the conventional depiction of royalty from
that period.19 Representations of more than one ruler do occur
at a couple of places. At Mat, near Mathura, there are statues of
Kuṣāṇa kings—perhaps of Vima Khadphises and Huviṣka, with
a headless statue of Kaniṣka identified from the label inscription.
The place is referred to as a devakula, family/house of the gods/
kings. This shrine is similar to the Kuṣāṇa shrine at Surkh Kotal in
Iran, described as the house of the gods.20 At Junnar, near Nasik,
there are representations of some Sātavāhana rulers.21 Portraiture
on coins is absent although there was a familiarity with the many
Greek and Roman coins with their fine portraits found in various
parts of the subcontinent.
4. Votive Inscriptions
The most widespread use of Prākrit was in votive inscriptions
at Buddhist and Jaina sacred places. The donations are recorded
at stūpa sites, on icons, and on pottery. Rulers are not donors in
significant numbers, nor are they given grandiloquent titles. The
donors are mainly ordinary people of varied professions whose
donations are either individual, or often as a family or community
group.
19 R. Thapar, “Rāyā Asoko from Kanaganhalli: Some Thoughts”, 249–62.
20 G. Fussman, “The Māṭ Devakula: A New Approach to its Understanding”,
193–9.
21 J. Burgess and B. Indraji, Inscriptions from the Cave Temples of Western
India.
332 The Past Before Us
From the second century bc to the third century ad, there is a
flood of votive inscriptions recording donations made by many
people to the building and adornment of Buddhist stūpas. Other
inscriptions on the pedestals of Jaina icons also record dona-
tions and acts of piety. Such inscriptions are important as sources
recording the splits in the Saṅgha, in ownership of property that
accompanied the importance of the site, and in reconstructions of
the history of Buddhism and Jainism. Apart from mentioning the
name, family, and occupation of the donor, as well as the place of
origin, the nature of the donation, and sometimes the sect to which
the donor belonged, the ruling king is occasionally mentioned. The
title of the ruler continues to be a form of rājā and nothing grander,
perhaps because the context is a pious act or because kings were
spoken of simply as rājās. These inscriptions record an act taking
place in the present, but are not oblivious of the future that will
look back on them as a record from the past.
Such inscriptions provide data on the honorand, what was being
honoured, by whom, and often also the kinship networks of those
doing the honouring. Extended families can be joint donors, as
can a monk or a nun together with their kinfolk. Occupations are
mentioned prominently and include small land-owners, artisans,
merchants. In the construction of a pavilion by the son of a mer-
chant, the list of donors includes the father, mother, wife, brothers,
daughters, daughters-in-law, grandson, kinsmen, and friends.22
Here, genealogy is not a source of status but rather an expres-
sion of a companionable donation covering family members past
and present, and even extending to the community or the guild.
This is particularly so of the category referred to as gahapati, i.e.
a householder owning land, livestock, and labour.23 The gahapati
in turn gave rise to the seṭṭhi-gahapati, the entrepreneur who used
his property as capital for establishing trade networks.24 The im-
portance of women donors, both nuns and lay women,25 and the
22 Ep. Ind., 10, Appendix: H. Lüders, “A List of Brahmi Inscriptions from the
Earliest Times to About ad 400” (henceforth Lüder’s List), no. 1024.
23 U. Chakravarti, The Social Dimensions of Early Buddhism, 69ff.
24 Ep. Ind., 10: Lüder’s List, nos 1056, 1073, 1075.
25 K.K. Shah, The Problem of Identity: Women in Early Indian Inscriptions; K.
Roy, “Women and Men Donors at Sanchi: A Study in Inscriptional Evidence”,
209–33.
Early Inscriptions as Historical Statements 333
frequency of metronymics in some dynastic inscriptions, such as
those of the Sātavāhanas, is noticeable. Discussions on these range
from their being pointers to matrilineal forms, to their indicating
cross-cousin marriage.
The most striking of the votive inscriptions is the much dis-
cussed Piprahwa Buddhist Vase Inscription of about the late third
century bc found in Basti District.26 A vase was donated by a
family to a Buddhist stūpa. The claim made in the inscription is
that it contained the relics of the Buddha—iyam salīla nidhane
budhasa bhagvate sākiyanam. It echoes the story in the Buddhist
texts that the relics of the Buddha were divided between the clans
that revered him and a stūpa was built over each collection. Was
this intended (apart from being an act of piety) to record the dis-
tribution of the relics to give it historicity?
This claim is repeated on a casket inscription within a set of
caskets found in the stūpa at Bhattiprolu in Guntur District.27
It would seem that relic worship had become so important that
claims of the relics being those of the Buddha were not questioned.
Relics are also regarded as proof of the historicity of the person.
Reference is made to a gothi (a community of Buddhists), and to a
negama (guild), whose members are named. They were obviously
local personages, some officials but also many others, who gave
various objects to be included in the donation and were handling
the caskets. Community donations meant that contributions were
made to construct the monument or acquire the caskets, and these
were acknowledged individually. Such donations would give a
sense of identity and history to the community.
The Buddhist veneration of a bodily relic contrasts with brah-
manical practice. The worship of a post-cremation relic would
be anathema to brāhmaṇas, for whom death was a source of
impurity. Yet it was widely practised in the megalithic and other
local cultures contemporary with the Vedic corpus. Attitudes to
death differed. Maintaining continuity through an artifact with
a person who had died also suggested historical continuity. This
would be part of the reason for the maintenance and veneration of
26 Ep. Ind., 10: Lüder’s List, no. 931; F. Barth, “The Inscription of the Piprahwa
Vase”, Ind. Ant., 1907, 36, 117ff.
27 Ep. Ind., 2, 323.
334 The Past Before Us
stūpas. The lack of burials of the dead from the first millennium
ad also eliminated the possibility of funerary orations recorded
as inscriptions—as were common in, for example, Greco-Roman
cultures.
As a parallel to the votive inscription at Buddhist sites, an un-
usual inscription at Mandasor records the building of a temple to
Surya by a silk-weavers’ guild that had immigrated from further
west. The author of the inscription had pretensions to being a poet,
but that apart a change in epigraphic style becomes apparent. The
eulogy is of the city of Daśapura, where the temple was located.
Praise is lavished on the local kings, although the Gupta overlord
is mentioned. The date is 493 in the Mālava era, i.e. ad 436. The
temple, having fallen into disrepair, had to be renovated thirty-
seven years later, in ad 473, the date of the inscription. Members
of the original guild, now in other occupations, nevertheless came
together to restore the temple and recalled their earlier association
in the inscription. The guild here is the equivalent of the extended
family of the Buddhist votive inscriptions.
Some inscriptions refer to Buddhist texts and teaching such as
the Nikāyas, stating that they go back to an earlier period. This is
reminiscent of Aśoka, in an inscription addressed to the Buddhist
Saṅgha, listing the teachings of the Buddha with which monks
should be familiar,28 the teachings being of an earlier period.
References to the rulers in inscriptions are in part to give an in-
dication of the date, and in part to provide an association with the
male donor of the royal family. Thus an inscription by a gahapati
mentions the year of the raño vāsiṭhīputa sāmi siri pulumāvi—the
king Vāsiṣṭhiputra Pulumāvi.29
u
Many considerations led to the choice of sites of stūpas and
vihāras, these being located in every part of the subconti -
nent. There could be an existing sacred place that went back to
prehistoric times. The more obvious of these were the sites of
28 Bhabra Edict, in J. Bloch, Les Inscriptions d’Asoka, 154–5.
29 Ep. Ind., 10, Lüder’s List, no. 1248,
Early Inscriptions as Historical Statements 335
megalithic burials, such as Amaravati, which was appropriated by
a large Buddhist structure engulfing the earlier one but the sacred -
ness of which became a historical continuity. This was a process
that continued throughout Indian history, with Hindu temples built
at the site of Buddhist caityas (halls of worship), as at Ter and
Chezarla; or Muslim mosques built at sites of Hindu temples, as
at Delhi and Ajmer. The inscriptions may not refer to the taking
over of such sacred spaces, but the archaeological and architectural
evidence for this is a historical statement.
Prākrit votive inscriptions were not limited to Buddhist sites.
Among others is a pillar inscription dedicated to Viṣṇu at the turn
of the Christian era.30 The pillar was established by Heliodorus, the
son of Diya/Dion, a native of the city of Takṣaśilā (Taxila) in the
north-west; he describes himself as a Yona/Yavana, the term used
for Greeks and West Asians. He is the dūta (ambassador) of the
mahārāja Amtalikita/Antalkidas to the rājan Kāsiputa. The pillar
is his declaration of being a follower of the Vāsudeva cult, one of
the many forms of the worship of Viṣṇu. It is worth noticing that
he refers to his king as mahārāja, whereas the local Indian king
is simply rājan, in keeping with the current Indian usage.
Another important set of inscriptions in Prākrit was the group
found at Andau in Saurashtra which date to the early second cen-
tury ad.31 Issued during the reign of Rudradāman, three genera-
tions of his ancestors are named, information that was becoming
common in inscriptions. The date is given as the year 52 but the
era is not mentioned. If it was issued in the currently popular Śaka
era, this would work out to ad 130, which would be in agreement
with the palaeography. The inscriptions have a Jaina association
and are funeral monuments of a family. As reminders of the past
these would become the historical records of the family.
There are many reasons for the extensive use of Prākrit as the
language of inscriptions. State administration wishing to com-
municate with a range of people, and not just the elite, made
Prākrit the language of polity; as the language of merchants and
artisans it was tied into trade crucial to the economy of the time;
30 Lüder’s List, no. 669, Besnagar Garuda Inscription, in D.C. Sircar, Select
Inscriptions, vol. I, 90–1.
31 Ep. Ind., 16, 23.
336 The Past Before Us
both Buddhism and Jainism, which had a considerable following,
used Prākrits, including texts that dealt with the past; the extensive
donations to stūpas and vihāras were from the upāsakas—lay
followers, who were Prākrit speaking, and among them women
were conspicuous. From the third century bc to the second century
ad, Prākrit was the language of the cosmopolitan discourse of
the South Asian region and its neighbourhood in virtually every
direction.
5. Sanskrit Inscriptions: A Different History
In the early centuries ad, Prākrit was gradually replaced by San-
skrit as the language of the court and of some public discourse.
With all the activity involving Prākrit and its pre-eminence in
epigraphs, one wonders at the absence of inscriptions in Sanskrit.
The use of Sanskrit in inscriptions begins tentatively in the early
centuries ad, and increases when Sanskrit comes to be associ-
ated with the royal courts. The language of the ritual texts was
distinct. The more commonly used Sanskrit of Pāṇini included a
wider range of texts that could be sources on the past, since even
some heterodox sects, such as those of Northern Buddhism, were
writing in Sanskrit.
Inscriptions in the Mathura region using Prākrit, but veering
close to Sanskrit linguistic forms, have been labelled Epigraphical
Hybrid Sanskrit.32 One among these inscriptions commemorates
the setting up of an image of a bodhisattva (a Buddha to be) by the
daughter of a local mahārāja and is dated to the twenty-third year
of the Kuṣāṇa king Kaniṣka. Another slightly later kharoṣṭhī ins-
cription gives the day, month, and year, again in an unknown era,
possibly the Śaka era of ad 78. The king is given elaborate royal
titles—mahārājasa rājātirājasa devaputrasa kaisarasa (the great
king, the king of kings, the son of the deity, the kaisara)—indeed
a far cry from the simple rājā of earlier inscriptions.33 The use
of these titles has been debated. Their frequent occurrence in the
north-west was perhaps the influence of Roman imperial titles,
32 Mathura Inscription, Ep. Ind., 28, 42ff.
33 Ara Inscription of Kanishka II, Ep. Ind., 14, 130ff.
Early Inscriptions as Historical Statements 337
where kaisara may be a version of Ceasar, and devaputra suggests
the Chinese “son of heaven”. The Kuṣāṇa kingdom had transac-
tions both with the Roman and the Chinese empire. Other than
adopting a fashion, it was an indicator of a change in the perception
of kingship: the king was now a far greater focus of authority and
power than had been the earlier rājā.
An inscription of the Śuṅga period from Ayodhyā records the
performance of aśvamedhas, followed by an ambiguous state-
ment that may refer to a person sixth in descent from the senāpati
(commander of the army), Puṣyamitra.34 In literary sources the
senāpati Puṣyamitra is said to have usurped the Mauryan throne
and founded the Śuṅga dynasty. The inscription corroborates the
designation and seems to refer back to a period prior to his being
king, possibly based in the Puranic dynastic list. As a brāhmaṇa
family, the Śuṅgas would have given preference to the use of San-
skrit, however bowdlerized. The publicity and significance given
to the performance of Vedic rituals in association with emerging
kingship at this time would have been qualitatively different from
the same rituals being performed by the rājās of earlier centuries.
The wealth expended on the ritual was most likely greater, even
if the ritual was performed in a different manner. The concept of
wealth was slowly beginning to include land, which had not been
the case earlier.
The use of a Sanskrit, not quite conforming to rules, is evident
from some early Sanskrit inscriptions.35 These refer to heroes of
the Vṛṣṇi clan and mention Saṃkarṣaṇa and Vāsudeva, and are
linked to the Puranic religion.36 However, a notable exception is
the well-known Bala inscription, which commemorates the estab-
lishing of a statue and monastery at Sarnath at the instance of a
Buddhist member of the Saṅgha claiming that it was on the spot
where the Buddha himself used to stroll.37 Such claims, more com-
mon among sects asserting historicity, was clearly the inventing
34 Ep. Ind., 20, 57ff.
35 Gosundi Inscription, Ep. Ind., 16, 25ff.; Hathibada Inscription, Ep. Ind.,
22, 198ff.
36 R. Salomon, Indian Epigraphy, 86–7.
37 Ep. Ind., 8, 176–7.
338 The Past Before Us
of a tradition. We may dismiss it as such, but its significance lies
in being an attempt to appeal to history, however garbled.
The initial spurt in Sanskrit inscriptions comes from an unlikely
quarter—the dynasties that ruled in the north-west, linked to Cen-
tral Asian origins. These would most likely have been included
under the label “vrātya kṣatriyas” (degenerate kṣatriyas). The
first inscription in standard Sanskrit, which marks the gradual
turning of public discourse from Prākrit to Sanskrit, was that of
Rudradāman, the mahākṣatrapa (the great satrap) of western India.
It was issued in 72 of the Śaka era, the equivalent of ad 150, and
engraved on the same rock as the set of Aśokan edicts at Girnar
in Saurashtra.38 The valley had been dammed by the Mauryan
administration to create the Sudarśana Lake, presumably as a
source of irrigation. The inscription describes the restoration of
the embankment after it had been destroyed during a fierce storm,
and is located where the edict of Aśoka was engraved.
The inscription mentions the builder of the dam as mauryasya
rājnaḥ candraguptasya rāṣṭriyena vaiśyena Puṣyaguptena kāritam
(the act of Candragupta Maurya’s governor, the vaiśya Puṣyagupta).
Subsequently, after another storm, it was restored by aśokasya
mauryasya te yavanarājena tuṣāsphena adhiṣṭhaya (Aśoka’s ad-
ministrator the yavanarāja Tuṣāśpa); and the current breach was
restored by his own governor Suviśākha. This awareness of the
history of the dam makes it evident that the location of his own
inscription juxtaposed to that of Aśoka Maurya was deliberate,
and intended as a continuation of the history. It is impressive that
an event of the fourth century bc was being recalled in the second
century ad and was to be remembered still later. The inscription
makes a particular point of stating that the restoration of the dam
did not require forced labour or extra taxes, for the finances from
the treasury were sufficient and the administrator Suviśākha was
an upright man and not susceptible to corruption.
Rudradāman’s inscription mentions his father, Jayadāman,
and his better-known grandfather, Caṣṭana. He acquired the title
of mahākṣatrapa through his conquests in the area and makes a
point of referring to defeating the Yaudheyas, who claimed to
38 Ibid., 42ff.; R. Salomon, Indian Epigraphy, 89.
Early Inscriptions as Historical Statements 339
be kṣatriyas. Presumably, this referred to the Puranic use of the
term kṣatriya to mean the clans of old, since the Yaudheyas were
known to be a chiefdom. He defeated Sātakarṇi the Sātavāhana,
but let him off because of a close relationship. He donated cows
to brāhmaṇas, which would have brought him the support of the
brahmanical orthodoxy. In listing the characteristics of a king he
mentions some of the requirements of a state system as given
in texts on political economy, such as the army and the treasury.
It is also noticeable that, although the dynasties of this period
were beginning to take grandiose titles, Rudradāman refers to
Candragupta Maurya as rājā. The latter part of the inscription is
more conventional in describing his good looks and the number
of svayamvaras where he won the hand of many a princess!
An obvious question is why a mahākṣatrapa whose title
indicates that he was not a local ruler, or for that matter other
kṣatrapas, should use Sanskrit for inscriptions. Prākrit was still
used and the earlier inscription of Aśoka at Girnar was in Prākrit.
Was the new ruler making a claim that although of alien stock he
was not a mleccha and that his status was as good as that of any
other ruler? Or was it becoming fashionable to use Sanskrit at
court to demarcate its membership, and he therefore chose it for
his inscriptions as well? What is surprising is that it took so long
for the language to attain status in administration.
Sanskrit became the established language of court and ad-
ministration from the mid-first millennium ad. Texts exploring
mathematics, medicine, and astronomy, as well as forms of cre-
ative literature, had already begun to use Sanskrit. The inferior
status of Prākrit is strikingly set out in the dramas of these times,
where upper-caste men spoke Sanskrit—all except the viduṣaka,
the uncharacteristic brāhmaṇa—whereas the women and lower-
caste men spoke Prākrit.
A few of the early Hybrid Sanskrit epigraphs are linked to the
emerging worship of Puranic deities, in particular Śiva and Viṣṇu.
Was the use of Sanskrit a method of identifying with the orthodox
against the earlier patronage to the heterodox sects, particularly
if one was not of the upper caste oneself? But the latter were also
using a Hybrid Sanskrit; why they were doing so is in itself a
question that needs an answer. Was the legitimizing of kingship
340 The Past Before Us
more accessible through brahmanical rituals? According to the
rules of the the Dharmaśāstras, Rudradāman would have been a
mleccha. In the previous period such rules were less adhered to,
but perhaps now they had become a part of the play of political
power. The possibility of a mleccha seeking or being given lineage
links with the Puranic descent groups was yet to come.
An entirely different category of inscriptions that begin as brief
records in the mid-first millennium ad but become more frequent
and elaborate in later centuries were those commemorating the
death of the hero and of the woman who became a satī.39 The
setting up of an upright stone slab as a memorial may go back
to the menhir of megalithic cultures, followed later by Buddhist
memorials to the dead. A generalized depiction of a hero in ac-
tion, often on horseback, is a new addition and gradually a brief
inscription is added. The satī is memorialized by stylized symbols.
The minimum information mentions a place and the date. Gradu-
ally, the hero-stone began to carry sculptured panels representing
the battle, or frequently the cattle raid, and the hero being taken
to heaven by apsarās. The sun and the moon at the top invariably
represent eternity. This elaboration was accompanied by longer
inscriptions recording the identity of the hero, the date and the
event. These changed from brief mention in Sanskrit to long
accounts of the event and the person in the regional languages.
Local ballads and short epics were the counterpart to the memorial
stones and sustained the memory of the person in greater detail.
Such hero-stones are found all over the subcontinent, particularly
in frontier zones subject to changes in political control.
6. The Centrality of the Praśasti
The efflorescence of Sanskrit as the language of the court and of
inscriptions in Sanskrit was established by the Gupta period. The
best known among the early ones was the retrospective inscrip-
tion on Samudra Gupta of the Gupta dynasty at Allahabad.40 It
39 R. Thapar, “Death and the Hero”, in idem, Cultural Pasts, 680–95; S. Settar
and G.D. Sontheimer (eds), Memorial Stones.
40 J.F. Fleet (ed.), Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, vol. III, 195ff.; S.R. Goyal,
A History of the Imperial Guptas, 122ff.
Early Inscriptions as Historical Statements 341
is regarded as an exemplar of the praśasti—the eulogy or pane-
gyric—and according to some scholars was issued by his son
Candra Gupta II in the fourth century ad. Samudra Gupta is given
the full imperial title of mahārājādhirāja, although even lesser
rulers were to take extraordinarily grand titles, much of which
was hyperbole. Praśastis refer back to dynastic origins, involv-
ing deities and ancient ṛṣis, as well as short genealogies, drawn
possibly from the records now maintained in royal courts. The
exaggeration of the formulaic can be separated from that which
is more historical. Conquests over kingdoms and over chiefdoms
are listed. The latter seem to have been politically more important
than is conceded by modern historians. The author of this praśasti
was the court poet Hariṣena.
The location of the inscription raises many questions. It is
engraved on the pillar erected by Aśoka, which carries his pillar
edicts in Prākrit—it is the one moved to the fort at Allahabad built
many centuries later. Apart from the edicts, and a couple of other
Aśokan inscriptions, and this praśasti, it also carries a brief Persian
inscription giving the lineage of the Mughal emperor Jahangir.
The inscriptions date to three different millennia and are in three
different languages. There are a few brief miscellaneous inscrip-
tions by sundry others, some in the nature of grafitti.
Why was Samudra Gupta’s praśasti engraved on this pillar? If
Aśokan brāhmī could still be read in the Gupta period, which is
possible, the message of the Gupta inscription, extolling military
conquest, contradicted Aśoka’s opposition to violence. Was it an
attempt to denigrate Aśoka and show Samudra Gupta as the great
conqueror? But that might have been more effective on a separate
and equally imposing pillar. Was the Aśokan message seen as a
Buddhist discourse which needed to be overwritten? Or was it,
on the contrary, an attempt at historical continuity evoking the
legitimacy of the Mauryan emperor?
Attempts were made in Gupta art to emulate some Mauryan
forms, especially in the capitals of the pillars.41 Such attempts at
41 Joanna Williams, “A Recent Aśokan Capital and the Gupta Attitude To-
wards the Past”, 225–40; idem, The Art of Gupta India: Empire and Province,
96ff.
342 The Past Before Us
historical continuity also led to inscribing praśastis in juxtaposi-
tion with other earlier inscriptions. Another Aśokan pillar, now
located on the citadel of the Sultan Firuz Shah at Kotla (Delhi),
carries a praśasti of Viśāla Deva, the Chauhan ruler of the Delhi
region, dating to the twelfth century, prior to the pillar being
shifted to Delhi in the fourteenth century. He mentions defeating
the mleccha, yet it was the mleccha that gave prominence to his
praśasti. These pillars highlight the importance of inscriptions as
historical memory, even if subconscious.
Various sultans brought pillars of earlier times to places of
importance in their territory, as for example the iron pillar of
Candra of the fifth century was brought to the Quwwat al-Islam
mosque at the Qutb in Mehrauli (Delhi) by Iltutmish. This is
further underlined when, in the fourteenth century, Firuz Shah
Tughluq shifted other Aśokan pillars to prime locations in the
proximity of mosques in an attempt to link the Sultanate with the
Indian past.42 The pillar at Fatehabad (Hissar) was engraved with
a lengthy Persian inscription giving an account of the history of
Firuz Shah, emulating in some ways the kind of history recorded
earlier on the pillars. It was said to have been crowned with a
golden kalaśa (cupola), as is done in Hindu temples. Pillars are
referred to in earlier times as jayastambhas and kīrtistambhas,
symbolic of victory and fame, even if, as in the case of Aśoka,
he disapproved of fame through conquest. Samudra Gupta’s in-
scription is a claim to conquest but that of Jahangir is a claim to
a respected ancestry.
There is a curious political ambiguity in the placement of the
Samudra Gupta praśasti on the pillar of Aśoka. The puzzle is
that in the brahmanical itihāsa-purāṇa tradition Aśoka is barely
mentioned, except as a name in the dynastic list of the Mauryas.
Presumably, this was because he was a patron of the Buddhist
Saṅgha. The title which Aśoka took, devānaṁpiya (beloved of
the gods), was treated with contempt in much of brahmanical
42 M. Shokoohy, “Haryana I: The Column of Firuz Shah and Other Islamic In-
scriptions from the District of Hissar”; F.B. Flood, Objects of Translation, 247–55;
E. Hultzsch (ed.), Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, I, xv–xvii; J. Irwin, “Aśokan
Pillars”, 706–7; C.B. Asher, “Appropriating the Past: Jahangir’s Pillars”, 8.
Early Inscriptions as Historical Statements 343
literature. Only in Buddhist historiography is he a figure of excep-
tional historical importance. His historical importance was known
but not reflected in brahmanical texts. The representation of Aśoka
as a respected ruler is not confined to Buddhist texts, as is evident
from the proximity of later inscriptions to those inscribed by him.
This was not merely a question of finding a convenient surface on
which to engrave a statement, but of deliberately choosing to be
associated with the earlier ruler or event. The choice of the site of
an inscription was made after much thought. It also underlines the
importance of a historical tradition that differs from the Puranic.
Imitating the Mauryan style in pillars is not the only example of
the Guptas making connections with the Mauryas. At Girnar there
is a third inscription of the later Gupta, Skanda Gupta, who records
that the embankment of the Sudarśana Lake burst, once again due
to heavy rain, in ad 457, and the local governor Cakrapālita had
it repaired.43 These are three sets of inscriptions spanning 800
years, but they are clearly linked to the building and breaching of
the same dam. What is impressive is that the previous breaches
were known and recorded. There is a suggested continuity in the
engraving of the inscriptions, and it would seem that the earlier
ones could still be read. References to the previous repairing of
the dam were not based on hearsay but on a precise record of what
had happened in the past.
The record-keepers of the state are referred to in a set of grants
from Damodarpur in eastern India. Issued during the late Gupta
period, the grants range from ad 443 to ad 533. The dates are
recorded in detail, mentioning the name of the Gupta ruler and
the date in the Gupta era. This was a requirement for legal docu-
ments, which is what the copper-plate inscription was meant to
be. The chronology was based on linear time.44 The grants pertain
to the purchase of various qualities of land which will enable the
purchasers to make benefactions.45 These copper-plate inscriptions
mark a departure: sale deeds and grants of land transactions are
43 Junagadh Inscription of Skandagupta, in J.F. Fleet (ed.), Corpus Inscrip-
tionum Indicarum, III, 56ff.
44 R. Thapar, Time as a Metaphor of History.
45 Ep. Ind., 15, 113ff.
344 The Past Before Us
a new and significant feature from this period. Land is purchased
by private persons to be gifted to religious beneficiaries in order
to acquire merit for the donor and his parents. The beneficiaries
here are brāhmaṇas and land is the item being purchased and
donated. Most of the requests are for tax-free fallow land which
has not been previously gifted. This required the checking of the
records relating to the land, and the price was doubtless fixed in
accordance with the state’s demand.
The dates given for the Gupta rulers provide a chronology and
a genealogy. Royal titles are most elaborate—parama-daivata
parama-bhaṭṭāraka mahārājādhirāja. This is not merely the influ-
ence of earlier Kuṣāṇa titles but also marks a demarcation between
the self-perception of the earlier rājās and the exaggerated sense
of persona of the current ones. These inscriptions are symptomatic
of a different kind of state. Even if the territory involved is on
the periphery of the kingdom, the legalities of its ownership are
controlled by a hierarchy of officials involved in both recording
and permitting the grant. The matter had also to be passed by the
civic administration of the governors and advisors who were offi-
cials, such as the mahattaras, aṣṭa-kula-adhikaranas, grāmikas,
and puṣṭapālas responsible for maintaining the records. Civic
patrons such as the chief merchant, artisans, and various scribes
were also consulted. Grants of land began to be given frequently
in the post-Gupta period, often for the performance of rituals or
because of the magnanimity of the ruler. Since some were quite
substantial grants, one has to examine possible political reasons
as well.
Originally, the grant was of the revenue from the land in lieu of
salaries, so it was the provision of an income. Gradually, however,
these being grants in perpetuity, the land itself came to be claimed
by the grantee. Grants of land were made to religious and ritual
specialists and to selected officers. Brāhmaṇa grantees were being
recompensed for performing rituals to enhance power, or to ward
off evil, or to provide a genealogy legitimizing the ruler with ac-
ceptable genealogical links. The last of these meant a familiarity
with the vaṃśānucarita of the Purāṇas and whatever else was
thought relevant in providing a kṣatriya genealogy. If the grant
was of wasteland or forest, it encouraged the grantee to convert
Early Inscriptions as Historical Statements 345
it to agricultural use. Brāhmaṇas, although forbidden from being
agriculturalists, did at least supervise the cultivation of these
lands, even if they did not cultivate them, as is clear from the
Kṛṣiparāśara, a manual in Sanskrit for wet rice cultivation, the
most lucrative crop in areas where water was available.
Kings conquering neighbouring kingdoms converted the de-
feated king and made him a sāmanta. Derived from sīmā (bound-
ary), it originally referred to a neighbour. It is now often translated
as “feudatory”, but should perhaps more correctly refer to an
intermediary. A hierarchy of intermediaries of differing rank and
function came into being, intervening between peasant and king.
The latter had the power to revoke the grant, even if categorically
stated to the contrary by the original grantor. Cancellations of
grants were infrequent since they created a nucleus of political
opposition.
In setting out the statement of a grant, together with the rights
and obligations of both grantor and grantee, and the occasion of
the grant, the statement encapsulated a historical event. An exam-
ple of such a grant at a relatively earlier period is one issued by
Prabhā vatī Gupta, the daughter of Candra Gupta II, married into
the Vākāṭaka royal family and ruled as the queen regent until her
son came of age.46 The grant is written on two copper-plates that
measure approximately 9 x 6 inches, originally held together by
a ring on which the royal seal was attached, authenticating the
inscription as being her command.
The grant provides the essential information. It invokes the
deity Viṣṇu. It provides the credentials of the donor, the queen-
mother, by giving her family connections as also a résumé of the
Gupta kings where, interestingly, she makes specific mention of
the queen Kumāradevī and her own mother, Kuberanāgā. The Lic-
chavi princess Kumāradevī was socially a cut above the obscure
Gupta family, as is indirectly conceded by the early rulers. She
46 The Poona Plates of Prabhāvatī Gupta, in V.V. Mirashi (ed.), “Inscriptions
of the Vākāṭakas”, in Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, vol. V, 5ff.; H.T. Bak-
ker (ed.), The Vākāṭaka Heritage: Indian Culture at the Crossroads; N. Sinha
Kapoor, “State Formation in Vidarbha: The Case of the Eastern Vākāṭakas”;
K.M. Srimali, Agrarian Structure in Central India and the Northern Deccan (c.
ad 300–500): A Study of Vākāṭaka Inscriptions.
346 The Past Before Us
also explains why she has the authority to make the grant, being
the queen regent for her son. As is normal in such inscriptions
she mentions the village granted and indicates its exact location.
The purpose of the donation is the acquisition of religious merit,
and the donation is sanctified by the pouring of water into the
hands of the donee. The latter is a brāhmaṇa well versed in the
four Vedas. The duties, obligations, and exemptions of the donee
are listed, and it is specifically stated that they are in accord with
the grants of former kings. Earlier records would therefore have
been consulted. The perpetuity of the grant is wished for, with
punishments for those who obstruct it. The name of the engraver
is mentioned.
Such grants of land on a bigger scale were often the nucleus
of what were later to become principalities and small kingdoms.
One such group is recorded in the well-known Khoh copper-plate
inscriptions of the mahārājā Hastin issued in the Gupta era of
156 equivalent of ad 475, and the later inscription of Samkṣobha
of ad 529.47 He claims to have come from a nṛpati-parivrāja-
kula (a family of royal ascetics) and was generous with his gifts.
Samkṣobha mentions Hastin having inherited an ancestral gift of
a brahmadeya grant (land given to a brāhmaṇa), which in this case
consisted of eighteen forest kingdoms. He was thus well able to
establish himself as a semi-autonomous ruler with his own feu-
datories, to whom he refers, and gifts a village to a brāhmaṇa in
turn. This is one example of how states and kingdoms encroached
into forests and cleared them for cultivation, by coercing the forest
dwellers to become their peasants, or settling cultivators from else-
where to labour on the land, with the grantee acquiring a source
of revenue. Many grants were of land already under cultivation,
or even a village, which was an immediate source of income for
the grantee. These inscriptions have been used by modern scholars
to suggest a new periodization of Indian history, differentiating
the late first millennium ad from the earlier period.
The inclusion of genealogies in the inscriptions begins in a
47 Khoh Copper-Plate Inscription of the Maharaja Hastin, in J.F. Fleet (ed.),
Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, vol. III, 93ff. Khoh Copper-plate inscription
of the Maharaja Samkshobha, ibid., 112ff.
Early Inscriptions as Historical Statements 347
small way with references to a few generations; it becomes more
prominent in the praśastis, and more so in the royal seals. Mem-
bers of ruling families such as the Guptas had their own seals.48
A number of clay sealings of the later Gupta rulers help recon-
struct the declining years of the dynasty. In the course of creating
genealogies, there was an increasing tendency to claim descent
in the Sūryavaṃśa or Candravaṃśa lineage, a reflection of using
the vaṃśānucarita of the Purāṇa as a source. Some families go
further and latch themselves to a particular descent group, and
among these many claim to be of the Yadu lineage.
The vaṃśānucarita of the Purāṇas, contemporary with some
of these inscriptions, projects the past in the form of genealogies
and dynastic lists. The epigraphic data is different, since genealo-
gies, although important, are not sole representations of the past.
Historical thinking was now beginning to shift towards recording
persons in the context of events as well as part of a dynasty. Nev-
ertheless, there is space for genealogies and they have a function
in the multiple claims to status, territory, and associations with
the past. There is a gradual move towards what may be called
externalized history, where the narrative is not embedded in a
religious text but is recognized independently as a distinct genre
and a historical record.
7. Historical Time in Inscriptions
A central feature of the inscription as a record was the fact that
it was generally precisely dated and followed one of many eras
current at the time.49 Initially, calendrical time was based on
the lunar year, each with twelve months in accordance with the
nakṣatras (constellations). Later there is a shift to the solar year,
although some reckonings continue to be made in the lunar year.
48 Nalanda Clay Seals of Budhagupta, Narasiṃhagupta, and Kumāragupta,
in J.F. Fleet (ed.), Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, III; B.C. Chhabra and G.S.
Gai, Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, III, 350–5; Bhitari Seal of Kumāragupta,
ibid., 358ff., 364ff., 319ff.; H. Sastri, “Nalanda and its Epigraphic Material”,
49–53; J. Marshall, ASI (Annual Reports), 1911–12, 44–60.
49 D.C. Sircar, Indian Epigraphy, 119ff.; R. Salomon, Indian Epigraphy,
180ff.
348 The Past Before Us
The division of time that covers the existence of the universe is,
as earlier discussed, into four yugas: the Kṛta, Tretā, Dvāpara, and
Kali. The calculation of the start of the present Kaliyuga as equiva-
lent to 3102 bc was finding acceptance.50 The yugas are referred
to but rarely used in defining a precise chronology in inscriptions.
They were tied to the time calculations used in astronomy. But
historical eras commemorate persons or events.
Time in the inscriptions is measured in a more linear form.
Many of the early inscriptions, such as those of Aśoka, Khāravela,
and some Sātavāhana rulers, mention regnal years. Others provide
a date but do not mention the era. Precision in dating through using
an era becomes more common from the fifth century ad. The most
commonly used era is the samvat (era), first referred to as Kṛta,
then Mālava, and finally and most frequently as Vikrama. This
is the equivalent of 58–57 bc. Who instituted it is still debated. It
may commemorate the accession of Azes I, as is the explanation
of modern scholars, even if Azes was not a particularly important
king. Or it may be a calculation used by astronomers at Ujjain,
the location of the meridian, and which was also the capital of
Mālava. In the inscription of the silk weavers at Mandasor it is des-
cribed as having been founded by the clan of the Mālavas. It was
subsequently renamed Vikrama, but the reason for this remains
unexplained. The other commonly used era was the Śaka era of
ad 78, as also the Kalacuri-Cedi era of 248–9 and the Gupta era
of 319–20. Eras used after the sixth century, which were plentiful
and of which some became obsolete, often commemorated events
of regional significance.51
8. Inscriptions as Historical Records
It has been argued that Sanskrit became a public political language
in the post-Gupta period and came to form a cosmopolis—a
cultural formation that transcended political boundaries and reli-
gious affiliations.52 The use of Sanskrit linked politics to a political
50 J.F. Fleet, “The Kaliyuga Era of bc 3102”, 479–96, 675–98; Varāhamihira’s
Bṛhatsaṃhitā, 13.3; Rājataraṅgiṇī, 1.49.
51 D.C. Sircar, Indian Epigraphy, 251ff.
52 S. Pollock, “The Cosmopolitan Vernacular”, 6–37.
Early Inscriptions as Historical Statements 349
culture beyond the region, whereas the later inclusions, of regional
languages in inscriptions, were records of specific local powers.
Could the same not be said of Prākrit in the Mauryan and post-
Mauryan period? Why then did Sanskrit become the hegemonic
language during this period?
Epigraphic Sanskrit was not of a uniform standard. A major
stylistic departure from earlier inscriptions was the praśasti.
Techniques of kāvya were used in praśastis, whose authors some-
times were court poets. The praśasti gradually became formulaic.
But it had a purpose. Obscure families claiming to be royal used
it to latch themselves to kṣatriya vaṃśas (lineages) given in the
Purāṇas or an equivalent status. The praśasti accommodated up-
ward mobility among ruling families. The inscription terminated
with a statement in Sanskrit mentioning the author, the scribe,
and the engraver—who were virtually the witnesses—and added
to the legitimacy. The use of Sanskrit in these inscriptions was
to become something of a formality in later periods, but also a
source of validating claims drawing from the past. The praśasti
had some affinities with, and was in some ways germane to, the
carita literature of royal biographies from the seventh century.
The functional portion of such inscriptions, such as the details
of the grant, was less literary, although crucial as a legal docu-
ment. In later centuries, it was optionally written in the regional
language to ensure accessibility to local administration. This
was reminiscent of the variants of Prākrit used in early inscrip-
tions. The Sanskrit passages were more formal. The wider use of
Sanskrit also evolved from the growing importance of literacy
and appreciation of literary composition even when providing
historical material. A change in language could mean a change
in authorship and audience, and a consequent change in function.
Buddhist and Jaina monks and the laity gave way ultimately to
court poets and officers of the administration. Particular languages
used for particular statements reflect social hierarchy.
The multiplicity of kingdoms, each with a court cloning the
more powerful ones, evolved through expansive grants of land.
Inscriptions attempt to encapsulate the political order of the time,
where sovereignty had to be acquired and protected. Dependent
on a hierarchy of political relationships, frequently founded on
350 The Past Before Us
a control of economic resources, those who could extend these
resources were central to the polity. Some brāhmaṇa grantees
therefore became agricultural entrepreneurs. Since land was
permanent wealth, it became hereditary, enabling the brāhmaṇa
to participate in the political culture and stamp it with the accou-
trements of his own culture—such as Sanskrit as the language of
authority. Sanskrit-knowing scribes, officials, and ritual specialists
were at a premium.
Added to this was the claim to controlling the supernatural and
the unforeseen through ritual. This brought the brāhmaṇa into
competition with the shaman and the priests of local cults, and
the former was not averse to incorporating some of the techniques
of the latter. The resulting religious practices were unpredictably
different from earlier ones.
Parallel to this was knowledge of various kinds, preserved
or rendered into Sanskrit, and going back many centuries, now
reinforced by the functional use of Sanskrit. The polity became
a play between those appropriating the expanded agricultural
economy, the underlining of caste status (which included a large
range of occupational and status identities becoming castes), and
the emergence of the many sects of Puranic Hinduism as a result
of religious incorporation from various sources.
Patronage gradually began to centre on the royal court, with
kings and the royal family and those associated with them as
ministers and administrators as the main players. The keeping of
records shifted from monasteries and local centres to courts and
prestigious families. As a semi-biographer the court poet writing
on the ruler altered the relationship between political authority and
its legitimizer. The poets were often brāhmaṇas, requiring ample
maintenance from a prosperous court. The less wealthy courts
probably had to make do with a bard. Brahmanical learning, even
of the non-ritualistic kind, flourished in āśramas and agrahāras, the
latter being based on substantial royal grants. A surfeit of educated
brāhmaṇas by the late first millennium ad led to their migrating
out from Gauḍa, Kanauj, and Kashmir to Gujarat, the Deccan and
elsewhere. This helped spread Sanskritic culture at elite levels.
It might also account in part for the multiple commentaries on
Sanskrit texts from the early second millennium ad.
Early Inscriptions as Historical Statements 351
The royal court also maintained record keepers who were part
of the administration. The akṣa-paṭala-adhikaraṇa-adhikṛta, for
example, maintained the legal documents. These included the royal
seals and inscriptions, both of which had to be verified before
being issued. Forged inscriptions (kūṭaśāsana) were known and
there was enough literacy to manipulate records from the past.
Copper-plate grants would be the obvious target for forgeries.
But sometimes even inscriptions on stone were tampered with
to change ownership.53 The composers of the inscriptions were
from the upper castes, but the engravers were less literate and of
the lower castes, such as goldsmiths. The importance of literacy
and of the court poet was enhanced by the occasional ruler who
claimed competency or more in the writing of plays and poetry,
such as Harṣa of Kanauj and Mahendravarman the Pallava king.
Harṣa wrote a fine calligraphic hand if the signature on one of his
inscriptions stating svahasto mama mahārājādhirāja śri harṣa (by
my own hand, mahārājādhirāja Harṣa) is his.54
Parallel to the āśramas and the agrahāras were the Buddhist
and Jaina vihāras, where there had been a premium on literacy
and learning since early times. Much of the monastic activity was
given over to copying texts. This is attested to by the large number
of manuscripts collected by Chinese Buddhists who travelled to
India in search of Buddhist teaching in the first millennium ad.
Jaina teaching similarly retained an interest in its early Prākrit
texts, but also shifted to writing in Sanskrit. Literacy and the wider
resort to inscriptions were interrelated.
Early inscriptions in themselves do not constitute a historical
tradition, but they reflect an obvious sense of historical con-
sciousness. I have touched on the articulation of four aspects of
this. Inscript ions are records and can therefore be consulted in
the future for information on the past. Thus, the record of the re-
pairs to the embankment at the Sudarśana Lake are available for
800 years.
53 As, for example, in the inscriptions at the Barabar and Nagarjuni caves,
where the original donation of the caves was by Aśoka and his grandson
Daśaratha, to the Ājīvika sect, but a later sect tried to obliterate this name: H.
Falk, Aśokan Sites and Artifacts, 258ff. and 270ff.
54 Banskhera Copper-Plate Inscription, in Ep. Ind., 4, 208.
352 The Past Before Us
There is an evoking of the past in order to make statements
about changes in the present. The Mauryan emperor Aśoka
reminds us that what he is doing now is new and different from
the same activity’s connotation in the past. Kings of past times
went on hunts and campaigns but he travels and speaks about
the dhamma, the social ethic that he is propagating. The past can
also be remembered by venerating the relics stated to be of those
who lived earlier.
And then there is the clear evocation of the past for calling
upon the legitimacy of history and the value of continuity. What
is remarkable is the consistency with which the pillars of Aśoka
are used for this purpose—by Candra Gupta II inscribing the
praśasti of Samudra Gupta, by Viśāladeva the Rajput, and even
more forcefully by Firuz Shah Tughluq and Jahangir. Evidently,
such pillars were the embodiment of a sense of history.
The inscriptions of the Gupta and immediate post-Gupta period
mark a departure from earlier statements on the past and anticipate
the form that state records were to take in later centuries. Relevant
information is given at some length. Care is taken over a reason-
ably accurate chronology. Mention is made of author and subject.
There is awareness of providing a relatively complete record,
perhaps because inscriptions were becoming legal documents
and the purpose had to be clearly stated. There is a conscious
introduction of the past as part of the formula for legitimizing
persons and actions of the present. The reuse of inscriptional
locations and inscribed objects with references to what happened
in earlier times points to the consultation of records. Inscriptions
are also aware of communicating information to posterity. By the
late first millennium, these developments were to be formalized
into a recognizable pattern which allows us to refer to inscrip-
tions as annals.
8
History as Literature
The Plays of Viśākhadatta
1. Drama
A preliminary turn towards treating itihāsa as a possible lit-
erary form and not just the record of lineages and dynasties
was the writing of plays based on historical themes. The
past was now to be remembered and recalled by reading the texts
that referred to it, and in the process being made relevant to current
historical concerns as well. A few of the plays, different from the
dramas of Sanskrit literature, are to that extent a distinct turn to
the historical, although not history.
The texts of the Gupta period which can be included in the
broad category of itihāsa constitute in some ways a watershed
between what I have called embedded history and externalized or
embodied history. The latter takes the form of distinctive genres
associated with historical writing. Historical consciousness slowly
gives way to the recognition of a historical tradition, initially in the
vaṃśānucarita section of some Purāṇas and in the early inscrip-
tions. These had a distinctly different function from ritual texts
inasmuch as they recorded events connected with political and
other activities of rulers and/or their patronage, even where the
royal gift contributed to the performance of a ritual. The political
context superseded the ritual.
Another contribution to historical consciousness came from
the Sramanic literature, within which Buddhist and Jaina authors
354 The Past Before Us
distanced themselves from brahmanical views. They forged an
alternative narrative on the events of the past. This sharpened
the need to examine the past from a different perspective, or else
represent it in a different way. Such representation of the past was
not arbitrary and incorporated an ideological function. In terms
of the past as part of the Puranic worldview, the challenge from
the Sramanic perspective would have further loosened the ties to
ritual texts.
At this point the historical tradition was tentatively introduced
into literature. Of the many literary forms emerging in the first
millennium ad, the dramatic genre deployed themes from the
historical tradition, even if infrequently. This is not altogether
unexpected, since this form lent itself more easily to projecting
actions and persons from the past. A variety of plays categoriz-
ed as nāṭakas came to be written, some of which hinted at
historical themes. Among the authors of these, Bhāsa of the
early centuries ad stood out. Apart from stories taken from the
epics, two of his best-known plays, Pratijñāyaugandharāyana and
Svapnavāsavadatta, hinted at historical themes wrapped in the
romantic exploits of Udayana of Vatsa.
A couple of centuries after Bhāsa, the Mālavikāgnimitra
of Kālidāsa draws on the past. The play touches on the hostil-
ity be tween the Mauryas and the Śuṅgas, although the plot is
central ly about the romance of the Śuṅga prince Agnimitra, and
Mālavikā. Kālidāsa also drew on believed history in his epic poem
Raghuvaṃśa (the lineage of Raghu, ancestor of Rāma). This refers
to seven generations of the lineage, ending with the descendants
of Rāma. The historical content of the poem is not to the fore, but
it carries a strong endorsement of brahmanical values, especially
in relation to the duties of kingship.
Plays were generally court romances involving kings and prin-
cesses, gardens and palaces, gently entangled plots and happy
endings. There are exceptions, but not many. The story-line was
largely fiction, and the plays occasionally touched on what were
perhaps incidents with historical connections. Beyond that, there
is little evidence of history. Strands of history become opaque
when enveloped by romance.
The audience for these plays would have been the court circles.
History as Literature: The Plays of Viśākhadatta 355
Plays were performed at court, and some may also have been per-
formed in homes of the wealthy, where the audience would extend
to respected townspeople, the nāgarakas, merchants, administra-
tors, and fashionable young men, some of whom met regularly
in parks and at the homes of gaṇikās (courtesans). The ambience
of the audience was essentially urban, and the plays assumed a
degree of sophisticated taste in literature and culture.
2. The Plays of Viśākhadatta
In the rich tradition of the writing of plays in Sanskrit at this time,
it is strange that there should have been only one dramatist of
note who wrote plays that were specifically on historical themes
with a strong political orientation. With Viśākhadatta we have
two plays that are focused on what, in other accounts, were his-
torical situations. The first, Devīcandragupta, has survived only
in fragments, passages from it being quoted in a later work, the
Nāṭya-darpana, which discusses drama. These passages provide
a flavour of the original. There are other passing references to an
incident in various texts, which dramatizes a court intrigue and
an act of bravado that eventually assisted Candra Gupta II of the
Gupta dynasty becoming king.1 The other play, Mudrārākṣasa, has
survived as a complete text.2 It has an entirely political focus and
is thus exceptional. The two plays differ in that the first emphasizes
conflict within the royal family, while the second explores the ac-
tions of two ministers, each with his candidate for royal succession.
A lost third play, Abhisārika-vañcitaka/Abhisārika-bandhitaka, is
also mentioned in some commentaries, such as those of Bhoja and
Abhinavagupta of the ninth-tenth centuries, but it appears to have
been quite unlike the other two in that it was a romance similar to
those of the earlier kind.
We know little about Viśākhadatta barring the couple of lines
1 S. Levi, “Deux nouveaux traits de dramaturgie Indienne”, 193–218; R.C.
Majumdar and A.S. Altekar (eds), New History of the Indian People, vol. VI.
2 M.R. Kale (ed.), Mudrārākṣasa of Viśākhadatta; K.H. Dhruva, Mudrārākṣasa
or The Signet-ring; G.V. Devasthali, Introduction to the Study of the Mudrārākṣasa;
C.R. Devadhar and V.M. Bedekar, Mudrārākṣasa of Viśākhadatta; V. Raghavan,
The Mudrārākṣasa of Mahādeva; R.S. Pandit (ed.), Viśākhadatta’s Mudrārākṣasa
or The Signet-ring; M. Coulson (trans.), Rākṣasa’s Ring.
356 The Past Before Us
traditionally mentioned in the opening of a play. His grandfather
was a sāmanta. The family acquired status in the next generation:
his father took the title of mahārāja. Their name suggests that
their ancestor could have been a brāhmaṇa who had been given
a grant of land, this being common among sāmantas. With this
background it is likely that Viśākhadatta had links to the court
and the politics of his time. These may have given him a taste for
history.
His date remains uncertain, but there is a mention in the colo-
phon of the play to a pārthivaścandraguptaḥ: this is likely to have
been Candra Gupta II of the Gupta dynasty, although some would
identify it with Candragupta Maurya. The Gupta identification
is strengthened by his associating a verse on Viṣṇu with Varāha,
the boar incarnation, which has Gupta connections, but none with
the Mauryas. This would date the author to the fifth century ad.
It has even been suggested that there may have been a kin rela-
tionship between him and the royal family through marriage.3 If
Viśākhadatta and Kālidāsa were close contemporaries, then the
former was overshadowed by the poetry of the latter. Viśākhadatta
has also been dated to a later century on the basis of alternative
readings of candragupta. Some of his plays carry different names—
avantivarman / rantivarman / dantivarman. These are names that
range from possible kings of Kashmir to South India over a long
period, and therefore are of little help in dating the author. Since
the verse in question is a praśasti of the king, it is likely that the
name was changed each time that the play was performed before a
new patron. If his patron was Avantivarman—the Maukhari king
and father of Grahavarman who married Harṣa’s sister Rājyaśrī—it
would date Viśākhadatta to the seventh century and make him a
near-contemporary of Bāṇa, another formidable literary figure.
3. Devīcandragupta
The story of the first play, Devīcandragupta, seems to be a defence
of the actions of Candra Gupta II, who, together with Samudra
3 R.S. Pandit, Viśākhadatta’s Mudrārākṣasa or The Signet-ring, Appen -
dix C, 171.
History as Literature: The Plays of Viśākhadatta 357
Gupta, was one of the two most prominent kings of the dynasty. So
in writing this play Viśākhadatta was either justifying the action
of his patron Candra Gupta II, or if he lived later he was praising
the actions of Candra Gupta II as an earlier and much renowned
king of the Gupta dynasty. More likely, it was the latter. In either
case it would seem that the actions had been criticized by some
members of the court, and it is more likely that the criticism was
in retrospect. Viśākhadatta was dramatizing the action of a past
king.
Candra Gupta claims in an inscription that he was “accepted
by his father”—tat-pari-grihīta—an unusual phrase where it
would normally have been tat-pāda-anudhyāta (meditating on
the feet of his father). It has been argued that this may have been
a covert way of stating that the accession was contested, making
it a euphemism for usurpation. The discovery of the play identi-
fied Rāma Gupta as the elder brother of Candra Gupta II, and the
latter may have eventually usurped the throne, omitting Rāma
Gupta from his inscriptions. The plot of the play is as follows:
Rāma Gupta, the son of Samudra Gupta, is associated with a rather
scandalous story. At the termination of a conflict with the Śaka
ruler of western India, he surrendered his wife Dhruvadevī to the
Śaka. This act enraged his younger brother, the kumāra Candra
Gupta, who went in disguise to the Śaka king’s palace and rescued
Dhruvadevī by killing the Śaka ruler.
As regards a possible historical context to the play, it is known
that the Śakas ruled in western India and that there was conflict
between the Śakas and the Guptas over the control of the region.
The hostilities were probably over acquiring ports that gave ac-
cess to the lucrative trade of the Arabian Sea. Rṇma Gupta could
well have been the Gupta heir-apparent appointed to govern the
troublesome territory of Mālava, which brought him into conflict
with the Śakas. Copper coins were discovered in Mālava, in west-
ern India, issued by a certain Rṇma Gupta.4 The name was not
known to the dynastic lists. It is unclear whether the coins were
issued by Rāma Gupta as king or as governor of Mālava. It is just
possible that Rāma Gupta had not yet been crowned, in which case
4 S.R. Goyal, A History of the Imperial Guptas, 226–7, 252–3.
358 The Past Before Us
the events would have taken place prior to the accession of either.
That he did become king is suggested by some inscriptions. These
are from three Jaina statues mentioning Rāma Gupta as mahā -
rājādhiraja.5
Primogeniture was upheld in the epics, but in the literature of
this period it was either glossed over or else explained away in
situations where it had not been observed: in theory, it was the ac-
cepted law, but may have been different in practice. Authors of the
carita literature could suppress what they felt was inconvenient.
In the play it is said that he surrendered his wife for the sake of
prakṛtīnām āśvāsa-naya (pleasing the people).
Other versions of the story occur in later texts, such as the
Harṣacarita of Bāṇabhaṭṭa, the Kāvyamīmāṃsā of Rājaśekhara,
the Śṛṅgāraprakāśa of Bhoja, Abhinavagupta’s commentary on
the Nāṭyaśāstra, and in some copper-plate inscriptions of the
Rāṣṭrakūṭa kings.6 In the latter, there is a comment on the moral-
ity of Candra Gupta, suggesting that this was discussed even into
later times. There appears to have been a competition between
the brothers for the love of Dhruvadevī; although she preferred
Candra Gupta, she was married to Rāma Gupta. A similar story
is told about a Bikramaris (thought to be Vikramāditya, a pos-
sible title for Candra Gupta II) in a Persian source of later times.
Here, Rāma Gupta is said to have abducted Dhruvadevī at her
svayamvara despite knowing that she loved his brother. Some
passing references of a later time state that Candra Gupta killed
Rāma Gupta and married Dhruvadevī. It seems to have became
a cause célèbre.
Surrendering the queen to the enemy is something of a stereo-
type. It occurs later, for example as a variant in the medieval story
of Padminī, the queen at Chittor, where she and other women are
said to have immolated themselves to preclude being dishonoured
by the enemy. In the earlier version, there was no question of the
5 B. Chhabra and G.S. Gai (eds), Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, vol. III,
231–4; G.S. Gai, “Three Inscriptions of Rāma-Gupta”, 247–51.
6 Harṣa-carita of Bāṇa, ed. and trans. E.B. Cowell and F.W. Thomas, 194;
Sanjan Plates, Ep. Ind., vol. XVIII, 235, where Candra Gupta is condemned
for his actions; H.M. Eliot and J. Dowson, History of India as Told by her Own
Historians, vol. 1, 110.
History as Literature: The Plays of Viśākhadatta 359
queen immolating herself, and it would seem that customs were
different. There is little said about what Dhruvadevī thought about
all this. Some commentators have hinted that the younger brother
marrying the widow of the elder was a form of niyoga (levirate),
despite his having killed his elder brother. Others condemn it and
describe it as an illicit act. In later years Dhruvadevī’s royal seal
identified her as the wife of mahārāja-adhirāja-śrī-candragupta
and the mother of Govinda Gupta.7 Such seals were stamps of
status and carried formal administrative rights. To some extent
the play portends the carita literature (yet to be written) which,
as biography, focused on a contemporary king and explained why
a younger brother usurped his older brother’s throne. It could be
said that Candra Gupta was saving the honour of the dynasty; but
his action was rather drastic. It is more likely that the play was
written during the reign of one of Candra Gupta’s successors,
when critical comment on him may have required his actions to
be justified.
4. Mudrārākṣasa
The second play, Mudrārākṣasa, has little to do with politics
in the Gupta court. It goes back 800 or more years to Mauryan
times. Viśākhadatta’s recreation of events is more imaginative
than historical. The interest of the play lies not in its being used
as a source for Mauryan history but as an attempt in the Gupta
period to represent an event from earlier times. The intention is
perhaps to provide a historical perception of this crucial period
of change. The title literally translates as “the seal”—in this case
the signet-ring—of Rākṣasa, the name of a minister of the Nanda
king, being the dynasty prior to the Mauryas, ruling in the fifth–
fourth centuries bc. The action of the play centres on the change
of dynasty. In choosing this event, there was a distinct perspect-
ive on a past dating back to eight centuries or so. The choice of
the name Rākṣasa is ironic since the person so called is far from
demonic: in fact quite the reverse. It is Cāṇakya, the other minis-
ter and one of the historical characters who features in the play,
7 ASI, Annual Report, 1903–4, 107.
360 The Past Before Us
whose machinations are demonic. Possibly the name refers to the
root *rakṣ, “to protect”. But what was he protecting? The Nanda
dynasty, or his own loyalty to the dynasty? Rākṣasa is not a name
familiar from the Nanda administration.
The play attempts to reconstruct the events of a crucial few
days when the Nanda dynasty was overthrown and the Maurya
established in its place. This occurred in about 324 bc, just after
the campaign of Alexander in north-western India. The Mauryan
aspirant was Candragupta, who is presented in the play as the
protégé of the brāhmaṇa Cāṇakya—also known as Kauṭilya and
later as Viṣṇugupta—the author of the well-known text on politi-
cal economy, the Arthaśāstra. Modern scholarship argues that the
large kingdom of the Nandas gave way to what emerged as the first
empire, that of the Mauryas. That Viśākhadatta chose this point in
the past seems to show an insight into the mutation of kingdom
to empire. The play enlarges the historical moment. There is no
reference to this change, but given the interest in Mauryan history,
especially in the Sramanic tradition, an awareness of it can be
assumed. Viśākhadatta imagines and reconstructs the event, intro-
ducing some elements of its possible historical background. That
in such dramatization a few anachronisms were also introduced
was not a problem since the author was not a modern historian.
Writing a play on a historical event was different from other
forms of representing the past. Historical biographies were still to
come. In some ways, this play is at a point where believed memory
has to incorporate the archive. A text claiming to be historical
would have to be accepted as such by readers and audiences, and
although there was scope for imagination, the imprint of the past
would need to be reasonably authentic. A play generally focuses
on a single major event, whereas the other forms we have dis-
cussed move through a series of events. The use of textual sources
would have widened the range of what was being made visible
from the past.
There is some evidence of interest during the Gupta period in
forms created during Mauryan times. This may have arisen from
a curiosity about antecedent dynasties and their artifacts, originat-
ing in approximately the same area in which the beginnings of
Gupta power were located. For both the Mauryas and the Guptas,
Pāṭaliputra was an important city. The use of the name Candra
History as Literature: The Plays of Viśākhadatta 361
Gupta for the first king echoes the Mauryan. Samudra Gupta’s
praśasti on an Aśokan pillar was not accidental; nor was the ack-
nowledgement of Mauryan enterprise in constructing the dam in
Saurashtra. The forms of the Aśokan pillars and their capitals were
imitated by various Gupta kings. The lion capital from Udayagiri
has been viewed as a possible Mauryan original re-cut a little to
suit Gupta aesthetics.8
Nevertheless, the deliberate choice of a significant event from
the past and the elaborate manner in which it is depicted sug-
gests that it was seen as relevant to the present. The relevance
doubtless lay in the politics of changing dynasties. A respected
and responsible minister from the previous dynasty could be an
asset to the newly established one, provided such a person could
be inducted voluntarily to serve the new one. His re-employment
would contribute to the dynasty’s acceptance, its status, and to
continuity of sovereign action.
5. Sources
Viśākhadatta used a variety of sources when constructing his
play.9 These included narratives that occur in the Buddhist and
Jaina traditions, either of this period or just later. In the case of the
latter, it would seem that there may have been a general borrow-
ing from floating oral renderings of the stories. The Purāṇas
state that the Śiśunāgas ruled over Magadha and founded the
city of Kusumpura, which later came to be known as the impe-
rial capital of Pāṭaliputra. They were succeeded by the Nanda
dynasty—Mahāpadma and his eight sons. The family was of low
caste, regarded as śūdra, as were their successors as well—tataḥ
prabhṛti rajāno bhaviṣyāḥ śūdra yonayaḥ (subsequent kings will
be born śūdras). The Nandas were uprooted by Kauṭilya, who
then made Candragupta the first Mauryan king.10 The immediate
8 J. Williams, “A Recent Aśokan Capital and the Gupta Attitude towards the
Past”, 225–40.
9 G.V. Devasthali, Introduction to the Study of the Mudrārākṣasa. For a dis-
cussion on sources that narrate stories about Kauṭilya and Candragupta, see
T.R. Trautmann, Kauṭilya and the Arthaśāstra, 10–66.
10 F.E. Pargiter, The Purana Text of the Dynasties of the Kali Age, 25ff.
362 The Past Before Us
events leading up to this are what Viśākhadatta imagines and
dramatizes in the play.
In the succession lists of the Purāṇas, dynasties are generally
not kin-related. Each is an independent family, often of a differ-
ent caste: the brāhmaṇa Śuṅgas succeed the low-caste Mauryas.
In the case of the Mauryas, however, there is an attempt to give
Candragupta a kin connection with the last Nanda king, although
not of a kind that would enable him to be a legitimate successor,
with a hint of his being born of a dāsī.11 Was this to emphasize
the śūdra caste of these kings and thus contradict the Buddhist
sources, which give them kṣatriya status?
The play describes Candragupta as mauryaputra (a scion of the
Mauryas). The controversy over whether or not he was related to
the Nanda family, legitimately or illegitimately, continued to later
times—judging by commentators on the play, who accept the story
of Candra Gupta being born of a Nanda king and Rākṣasa being
a prominent minister. Had Viśākhadatta accepted this story, there
would have been little conflict over succession.
Viśākhadatta evidently knew the Arthaśāstra well. There are a
few parallel discussions in the play and the text, such as the one
on the six expedients of policy, which are unlikely to be coinci-
dental.12 The role of a variety of secret agents in working out the
actions of the plot is as advised by the Arthaśāstra. This text was
revised as late as the third century ad and was then attributed to
Viṣṇugupta, an alternative name for Cāṇakya referred to in the
play. In drawing upon the Arthaśāstra, Viśākhadatta was also in a
sense endorsing what the text taught. In condoning the immoral
politics of Cāṇakya, the author was perhaps defending the text
against other views of politics which may have been rooted in a
more humanistic social ethic.
Cāṇakya is known to Buddhist authors but less so in the early
texts. A reference is made in the Mahāvaṃsa to Cāṇakya assist-
ing Candragupta, and this version or an oral one may have been
known to Viśākhadatta.13 The Mahāvaṃsa was composed about
the fifth century ad. More detailed stories come from the later
11 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 4.24.17–28.
12 Arthaśāstra, 1.11–12; Mudrārākṣasa, 7.1.1.
13 Mahāvaṃsa, 5.16.
History as Literature: The Plays of Viśākhadatta 363
commentary on this text, the Vaṃsatthappakāsinī. The references
to Cāṇakya are not the most complimentary, but it would seem
that there was an oral tradition in which these stories were prob-
ably repeated and therefore survived. Viśākhadatta’s projection
of Cāṇakya as the mastermind behind the rise of the first Maurya
could be seen as an attempt to diminish the Mauryas. The policies
of Aśoka, for instance, much applauded in Buddhist texts, were
ignored in the Purāṇas.
The Mahāvaṃsa narrates its version of the history of the first
three Mauryas. The termination of Nanda rule is attributed to a con -
flict with Candragupta Maurya, where the latter was tutored by
Kauṭilya, who had his own reasons for bringing down the Nanda
dynasty. The Mauryan is described as a kṣatriya belonging to a
clan related to the Śākyas. Cāṇakya is represented as a brilliant if
shrewd strategist who was insulted by the Nanda king and there-
fore swore vengeance.14 He is said to have faked a vast sum of
counterfeit money and looted the hidden wealth of the Nandas.
With this he acquired an army to overthrow them. He put the young
Candragupta of the Moriya clan to various tests, recognized his
potential, and made him his protégé for kingship. There is an ele-
ment of grand adventure in a young man from a fairly unknown
clan being trained for kingship by a politically astute brāhmaṇa.
This doubtless became more common in Viśākhadatta’s own time
with the frequency of sāmantas aspiring to kingship.
Another Buddhist text of the early centuries ad, the Milinda-
pañha, refers to a major conflict between the Nandas and the
usurper Candragupta Maurya advised by Cāṇakya.15
Jaina sources also elaborate on these events but most of them
were written subsequent to the play. The Nandas are śūdras, Cāṇakya
is a Jaina. He has an altercation with the Nanda king, whom he then
vows to overthrow, and which he does by adopting Candragupta,
finally establishing him as king. In between there are many colour-
ful episodes of their activities.16
14 Vaṃsatthappakāsinī, 181.12, 186.26.
15 T.W. Rhys Davids, The Questions of King Milinda, vol. II, 147; Milinda-
pañho, IV.8.26 (292).
16 Sthaviravali/Pariśiṣṭaparvan of Hemachandra, 6.231–2, 8.2, 8.194,
8.415ff.
364 The Past Before Us
It is unlikely that Viśākhadatta read the Greek and Latin
sources, although their contents may have been known to him.
These are generally biographies of Alexander written after his
time, and therefore references to the Nandas and Mauryas are
taken from other accounts. They mention Sandracottos/Candra-
gupta and the Nanda king Xandrames or Agrammes, and give
exaggeratedly huge figures for his army.17 Sandracottos, in some
accounts, is said to have met Alexander as a young man and he
later overthrew the governors left behind by Alexander. The role
of Cāṇakya in establishing Candragupta as king is conspicuously
absent in these accounts.
The play filled out the sparse references and created a version
of the history of these events. But it was a version that viewed
them from the perspective of the Gupta period. The continuing
association of the minister, Rākṣasa, with the last deposed Nanda
king would have been an idea furthered by the play, as also the
depiction of the character of Cāṇakya. The character of Rākṣasa
and his dilemma are a creation of Viśākhadatta.
This poses some questions for the historian. We have to ask
what was picked up from the sources—in terms of the selection
of events and persons in constructing a statement concerning a
particular event of the past—and why this was done. Having re -
constructed the event in whatever form and associated it with
history, how did this reconstruction in turn help formulate later
views about the event? In other words, what is the agenda of the
Mudrārākṣasa? The play attracted commentaries among later
litterateurs.
In order to consider these questions, I would like to begin with
a brief synopsis of the plot. It is immensely complicated, with
moves and counter-moves, and disguised double agents and
spies weaving in and out. Plays about conspiracies such as this
one thrive on uncertainties keeping the audience in suspense.
History requires explaining an event. The play attempts this, albeit
indirectly.
17 J.W. McCrindle, The Invasion of India by Alexander the Great, 221ff.;
Quintus Curtius Rufus, History of Alexander the Great, 9.2; Justin, 15.4.10–21;
Plutarch, Life of Alexander, vol. LXII, 403; R. Thapar, “The Role of the Army
in the Exercise of Power in Early India”.
History as Literature: The Plays of Viśākhadatta 365
6. The Text
The Prologue, as is usual in Sanskrit plays, has a sūtradhāra (stage
manager) who announces a new play, Mudrārākṣasa, by the poet
Viśākhadatta and provides the barest information about him.
The intention of the Prologue is to introduce the persons around
whom the play revolves. The time period of the play covers just a
few action-packed days, although a longer preamble to these acti-
vities is assumed.
The opening Act informs us that the last Nanda king has fled
and Cāṇakya is preparing the coronation of Candragupta. There
remains however the problem that the most prestigious and highly
respected minister of the Nanda ruler Rākṣasa continues to be
loyal to the Nanda king and is working towards restoring the
dynasty. It is imperative therefore that his loyalty be transferred
to the young Maurya, to lend legitimacy to the change. This has
to be done not by defeating him in battle but through diplomacy:
defeat in battle would not permit him to become chief advisor to
the young Maurya. It is to this end that Cāṇakya has to work out
strategies of intrigue and counter-intrigue; he must trap Rākṣasa
into having to support the new king. Yet he is aware of and envies
the strength of Rākṣasa’s loyalty to the previous dynasty.
We are told that Rākṣasa is supporting another claimant to the
succession, a prince associated with the Nandas, Malayaketu, and
is therefore opposed to Candragupta. One of Cāṇakya’s spies picks
up the signet-ring of Rākṣasa almost by accident and takes it to
Cāṇakya. Cāṇakya can now send sealed letters in the name of
Rākṣasa making all kinds of statements, adding to the confusion
already created by the double agents.
A close friend of Rākṣasa, the jeweller Candanadāsa, is arrested
on Cāṇakya’s orders because he has sheltered Rākṣasa’s family and
refuses to divulge where they are. Cāṇakya knows that Rākṣasa
was also loyal to his friends, and therefore any harm to a friend
would lead to Rākṣasa intervening in his defence.
A snake-charmer, in fact a spy, visiting Rākṣasa speaks elo-
quently about the properties required to handle both snakes
and kings. There is a need for administrative skills, knowledge
of spheres of influence, the ability to draw on antidotes where
errors occur, discrimination in the use of sorcery, and maintaining
366 The Past Before Us
secrecy. The introduction of a snake-charmer into the plot becomes
almost a subtle commentary on the persons and their activities.
Cāṇakya is busy getting rid of Rākṣasa’s supporters, one by one.
The signet-ring is brought back to Rākṣasa and he gives it for safe
keeping to a friend, who is actually Cāṇakya’s spy. Cāṇakya and
Candragupta pretend to have a dispute so as to confuse Rākṣasa,
knowing that this will be reported back to him. This fans the
rumour of a split between them, but is part of Cāṇakya’s plot.
Arguing over the qualities of Rākṣasa leads to another spat.
Candragupta threatens to take over the government but soon real-
izes that he cannot do without his preceptor. This part of the play
comes close to depicting the raw quality of politics and diplomacy
beneath a veneer of politeness.
Rākṣasa consults a Jaina monk to ascertain an appropriate time
for a counter-offensive, not knowing that the monk is a spy, and
finds the monk’s response curiously evasive. Cāṇakya through vari-
ous moves succeeds in alienating Rākṣasa from Malayaketu, who
was Rākṣasa’s candidate and a rival to Candragupta. A man is
caught with a letter, sealed with Rākṣasa’s ring, purporting to be
written to Candragupta by Rākṣasa and stating that the allies of
Malayaketu are increasingly becoming disloyal to him and their
loyalty can be bought. The letter deflects the plans of Rākṣasa.
Rākṣasa hears that his great friend Candanadāsa is going to
be executed by Cāṇakya for not disclosing the whereabouts of
Rākṣasa’s family. So he decides to enter the capital city unseen,
and try and save Candanadāsa, which is of course precisely what
Cāṇakya wants. The execution of Candanadāsa is being prepared
by the executioners, who are two Caṇḍālas—outcastes. Rākṣasa
speaks of this with anguish to another person and states that he
will save his friend, whose life is valuable to him. He seems to
anticipate what the cost will be, because he adds that there remains
little he can do to help the Nandas.
In the final Act there is a discourse on politics by the two Caṇḍā-
las, who are as cynical about politics as was the snake-charmer.
It is interesting that the articulation of cynicism comes from
those who are regarded as social inferiors. Rākṣasa enters and
stays the execution by sending the two executioners to report to
Cāṇakya that he is surrendering himself in order to save the life
History as Literature: The Plays of Viśākhadatta 367
of his friend. Cāṇakya appears and praises Rākṣasa and states he
wants him to be minister to Candragupta. He also adds that the
two Caṇḍālas are really not Caṇḍālas but his spies. He reveals the
intricacies of his espionage to trap Rākṣasa. Candragupta enters
and is told to greet Rākṣasa with respect. Rākṣasa is informed that
unless he agrees to support the Maurya, his friend Candanadāsa’s
life will not be spared. Rākṣasa reluctantly agrees, out of friend-
ship and loyalty to his friend. The play ends with a verse in praise
of a king, Candragupta.
7. Playing with History
The play takes on something of the imagery of a game of chess
between Cāṇakya and Rākṣasa. Chess (śatraṅja) was by now fairly
widely known. Cāṇakya is the smarter player, takes nothing for
granted, and anticipates moves well in advance. Rākṣasa is the
gentler of the two, more humane and less clever. He is not averse to
plotting moves but is a little surprised when he is double-crossed.
His main strength is his unflinching loyalty to the Nanda dynasty
now being overthrown, and this now becomes a dilemma for him.
The pawns are easily knocked off. They are the spies in various
guises and roles, switching identities and virtually creating many
small plays within the play. The final Act moves towards the
kill—the trapping of Rākṣasa—and culminates in Cāṇakya’s suc-
cess not only in trapping Rākṣasa but forcing him into becoming
a minister to the Maurya king. Plotting on this scale makes even
the army redundant. It would seem that Viśākhadatta understood
the mind behind the Arthaśāstra. It is this that he transposes into
his characterization of Cāṇakya.
Although Rākṣasa prepares for a campaign against Candra-
gupta, Cāṇakya works successfully towards getting Rākṣasa to
support the Mauryan prince without a campaign. Cāṇakya’s de-
termination to do this indicates that the authority of this minister
was crucial to the establishing of the Mauryan polity and its ac-
ceptance by the people, at least in the eyes of Viśākhadatta. The
emphasis on this continuity despite a change in the ruling family
is significant. Yet Rākṣasa is merely one among other ministers
and is rarely singled out until late versions of the story.
368 The Past Before Us
Winning Rākṣasa over would have been a political achievement
since, apart from upholding the legitimacy of Nanda rule, he also
had the support of the prakṛti—here, the people. This carried sta-
bility and legitimacy. The use of the word prakṛti for people, rather
than the more common prajā (children or subjects), indicated
something more than just subjects. The word also means nature,
or that which is regarded as natural. Rākṣasa being the natural
and better choice as minister is being hinted at, and he has the
sup port of the people. There is a political significance, therefore,
to Rākṣasa being inducted, by whatever means, to serve the new
king, rather than merely being killed. This establishes the histori-
cal continuity between the two dynasties as stated in the Purāṇas.
Perhaps Viśākhadatta was exploring the statement in the Purāṇas
that Cāṇakya made Candragupta Maurya king and was trying to
envisage how this could have been done.
The plot of the play raises many questions: Why did Viśākhadatta
choose this particular historical moment? Did this reflect his
understanding of the importance of the Mauryan system in the
past? Or did it resonate with the politics of Gupta and immediately
post-Gupta times, such as the possible tension between kings and
ministers? Was he presenting a contrast via his representation of
the two ministers? Cāṇakya was being projected as a counter to the
former. Was the author’s intention somewhat limited when it came
to explaining how Rākṣasa came to be minister to Candragupta?
Was his larger intention to project the dilemma of Rākṣasa, a
dilemma that would have faced ministers whenever there was a
change of dynasty? Was he suggesting that there were other ways
than war to attain success—a perspective apposite within a world
where conquest was the pre-eminent value, as set out in the
praśasti of Samudra Gupta? Events of consequence had to be
explained.
The transition to imperial governance by the Mauryas would
have been another theme. Given the conspiracy and counter-
conspiracy in the play, it was not thought of as an ordinary situ-
ation and required an intricacy of plots. Nevertheless, there is
no anticipation of a forthcoming grand design in the political
economy under the Mauryas, nor of a new civilizational culture.
Candragupta is a pliant young man, a trifle childishly ambitious
but anxious to please his preceptor. In the scene where there is
History as Literature: The Plays of Viśākhadatta 369
pretence at altercation, there is a hint of the making of an indepen-
dent king. It would be hard to believe from this characterization
that—according to the Greek sources—Candragupta had already
met, and in some versions opposed, Alexander; nor that he was to
overthrow the Greek governors appointed by Alexander to rule the
provinces in the borderlands, and to spend his reign in extensive
conquests and the consolidation of these.
The focus is on the rather different character and activities
of the two ministers. Loyalty, intelligence, and courage are the
prime requirements of ministers. Rākṣasa is uncomplimentary
about Cāṇakya since he refers to him as baṭu/baṭuka, terms some -
times used contemptuously for dubious brāhmaṇas. This is an
apt description, in many ways, but it does lower his esteem as
the minister counselling and guiding a young prince. The author
seems to subscribe to the view that the name Kauṭilya came from
the epithet kuṭila, meaning “crooked”. Cāṇakya is single-minded
in his objective of overthrowing the last Nanda. He is fulfilling his
vow to dethrone the Nandas. He expresses both envy and appre-
ciation for Rākṣasa’s ability to be loyal. Rākṣasa, he says, is the
lone wild elephant roaming the forest who has to be trapped and
made to serve the new king.18
In some ways the play is about the centrality of loyalty even
within political diplomacy. Was loyalty so strongly underlined
because it was being devalued in contemporary courts with the in -
crease in competition for power? Was the writing of the other play,
Devīcandragupta, an act of loyalty on the part of Viśākhadatta to-
wards Candra Gupta II? Yet it has been argued that loyalty was in
fact at a premium at the time.19 Rākṣasa had to sacrifice his loyalty
to the Nandas in order to save the life of his friend. Possibly this
requirement of loyalty was because of the turnover of sāmantas
and the evaluating of patronage in terms of who was providing
the greatest benefit. In using the term bhakti, a distinction has to
be made between the devotion to a deity, which might be absolute,
and that to an overlord, which might be more considered. Loyalty
was not to be equated with servitude.
18 Act 1, v. 27 (‘v.’ indicates verse).
19 Daud Ali, Courtly Culture and Political Life in Early Medieval India,
104–7.
370 The Past Before Us
The importance of Rākṣasa is further indicated by the title of the
play. The signet-ring was popularized in India by the Indo-Greeks
at the turn of the Christian era and is referred to as a central ob-
ject in more than one narrative, the more obvious ones being the
Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa and Kālidāsa’s version of the Śakuntalā story.
The symbolism of such a ring was that in capturing the identity
of the person, the person himself was captured. Cāṇakya’s sealing
of the letter with Rākṣasa’s signet-ring, once it is in his hands, is a
turning point in the play. It signals Rākṣasa’s loss of identity and
presages the eventual capturing of this identity by Cāṇakya.
Cāṇakya has no illusions about being in effect a king-maker.
This role, and that of preceptor to the king, often overlap. There
is a play on the relations between kings and ministers. Historical
drama also highlights the parallel representation of person and
office in the same character. That there was a tension is apparent
when Cāṇakya does not allow Candragupta to make a lavish dona-
tion to the bards, and the young prince says he feels a prisoner
rather than a king—bandhaniv rājyam na rājyamiva.20 Rākṣasa
guesses rightly that the rift is more pretence than real, for ordi-
narily Cāṇakya would have stormed out if thwarted. But the play
does suggest that such tensions were not unusual between kings
and ministers.
The legitimacy given to the king through the support of a minis-
ter respected by kings and their subjects seems to have outweighed
the legitimacy from rituals and genealogies, or the conquests of
the king. Interestingly, none of these are mentioned in the play
as the normal techniques of establishing legitimacy. Cāṇakya in
the play consistently refers to Candragupta as vṛṣala, which is
used both for śūdra or low-caste status and for heretics. Rākṣasa
is equally scathing in referring to Candragupta as kulahīna (base-
born).21 This contempt was the privilege of an upper-caste man
when dealing with one of low caste. Ironically, the caste of the
Nandas was no higher, yet Rākṣasa speaks of them as a family
deserving respect.22
20 Act 3, after v. 23.
21 Act 2, v.7; Act 6, v. 6.
22 Act 6, v. 6; Act 4, v. 11.
History as Literature: The Plays of Viśākhadatta 371
Kṣatriya status was obviously not required in these earlier times,
even for a low-caste adventurer rising to power. In a sense, this
is all the more impressive since his preceptor was a brāhmaṇa. It
would seem that once a king was installed his caste was virtually
irrelevant—judging by the complimentary epithets received by
kings from their supporters. This could have been intended to point
up a contrast to the current fashion, from Gupta times onwards,
for dynasties to acquire upper-caste status when establishing a
kingdom, whereas the historical reality was that few dynasties
claimed kṣatriya status until post-Gupta times. Or else it was in-
tended as an emphatic contradiction of the Buddhist sources,
where the Mauryas were said to be kṣatriyas.
The observance of caste rules is uncertain, and perhaps they
changed from the Mauryan to Gupta period. Both Rākṣasa and
Cāṇakya were, as brāhmaṇas, technically serving śūdra kings,
contravening the normative code. So too is the commitment and
close friendship of Rākṣasa for Candanadāsa, a vaiśya. Candra-
gupta, despite being called kulahīna (low born), speaks Sanskrit
because he is slotted to be the king. Other low-born people in the
play speak Prākrit, as the literary rules require. The language
used carries implicit statements beyond just the use of a particular
language, often formulaic.
Religious sectarianism of the Gupta period views Jaina monks
as ill omens, and there are no Buddhists on the scene. This is a
condition close to the Gupta period, not to the Mauryan. Both
these heterodoxies were flourishing in the early period, but less
so in post-Gupta times. The play has little recourse to religion, as
at every move politics is the end game.
The two executioners remain Caṇḍālas, as from earlier times.
Rākṣasa, in the last Act, despite all his tribulations, warns Cāṇakya
not to touch him as he has been in contact with the Caṇḍālas, at
which point Cāṇakya explains that they are not really Caṇḍālas.
The concern of one brāhmaṇa for the ritual purity of the other is
striking, given that they were, in a sense, enemies. Yet, interest-
ingly, neither of the protagonists conforms to the conventional
image of the brāhmaṇa as defined in the Dharmaśāstras. Their dis-
tance from the other castes is negligible, barring the Caṇḍālas.
The allies of Malayaketu, described as the mleccha rājās, are a
372 The Past Before Us
bit puzzling. They are from the borders of the realm—Kulu, the
hill country; Kāśmīra; the Indus land; and the north-west. In the
period with which the play is concerned, these could have been
borderlands prior to their conquest by the Mauryas. Some of these
rājās want territory in return for their support to Malayaketu,
others want horses and elephants.
Was the play a putting down of the Mauryas, the only dynasty
of consequence from the Ganges heartland prior to the Guptas?
The Mauryas did not conform to brahmanical norms and were
patrons of the Jainas, Buddhists, and Ājīvikas. Aśoka had made a
sustained attempt to introduce a social ethic divorced from divine
sanction and dependent on human behaviour, which he expounded
as dhamma in his edicts. He was eulogized in Buddhist sources.
Given the high visibility of Buddhism in the post-Mauryan period,
this would have been viewed as a threat to brāhmaṇa orthodoxy,
with its ethic based on the primacy of varṇāśrama-dharma and
caste obligations. Rākṣasa describes the Nandas as a family of
status; the Mauryas are the reverse, although Cāṇakya does not
agree.23
Or, alternatively, was this particular historical event being viewed
as something that was in earlier times rare—a brāhmaṇa bring -
ing a family of obscure origin to power—but was familiar now.
Although the play does not present Candragupta as a Jaina, there
is nothing to suggest that he was committed to orthodoxy of the
brahmanical mould. Viśākhadatta’s explanation of the event did not
follow conventional lines. The intention was not to recite facts but
to try and understand a situation by re-enacting the event—with
the caveat that the re-enactment need not be “as it really was”.
This does not represent history, but it introduces the ethics which
the event provokes. So it can be seen as part of historical ex-
planation.
From the brahmanical perspective it was important to empha-
size the power of Cāṇakya as king-maker. This would decrease
the status of the Mauryan kings, all of whom were patrons of
heterodoxy. It could also be suggested that Viśākhadatta represents
Cāṇakya as using underhand means for installing Candragupta,
23 Act 6.6, 4.11, 2.7, 3.18.
History as Literature: The Plays of Viśākhadatta 373
and therefore suggesting that the Mauryas should not be treated
as role-models for the Guptas. Or is he justifying the means for
a purposive end? Or does the play intend to highlight the role of
brāhmaṇa ministers in a polity such as that of the post-Gupta
period, when there was a competition for power between kings and
ministers or intermediaries—the latter often being brāhmaṇas—
and when the advantage was with the kings? Cāṇakya’s methods
were well known from the implicit intentions of statecraft, as set
out in the Arthaśāstra, apart from the stories about him. Rākṣasa
was the counterfoil.
Malayaketu is scathing about the duplicity of ministers.24 Rāk-
ṣasa concedes that Cāṇakya is the great tactician when he says
ekamapi nītibījam bahu phalatāmeti yasya tava (the single seed of
polity producing multiple fruit).25 The play is a contest between
two ministers:the respective princes whom they support are mar-
ginal. Candragupta was informed by Cāṇakya that Rākṣasa was
to be his amātya-mukhyam (chief minister). Candragupta was in
conformity with this decision inasmuch as he respected Rākṣasa,
but even such a major decision was in Cāṇakya’s domain. The
political function of the protagonists has its own criteria of evalu-
ation and is extraneous to the normative texts. Did the author see
the transition from Nandas to Mauryas as a continuity of the rule
of lower-caste dynasties? Or was there a notion that, despite the
kings, effective control continued to be in the hands of brāhmaṇa
ministers? In effect, politics is being presented as outside ritual
and normative requirements.
Cāṇakya, in conversation with Candragupta, refers to the three
forms of government discussed by specialists in political economy:
a dependence on the king, or a dependence on the minister, or the
interdependence of both.26 Here the dependence seems to be on
the minister, although there is a suggestion of the prince moving
towards greater independence. Rākṣasa rather dismisses him as
being too dependent on Cāṇakya. Apart from vṛṣala, which carries
more than a hint of contempt, Cāṇakya also refers to Candragupta
24 Act 4, v. 8.
25 Act 2, v. 19.
26 Act 3, after v. 19.
374 The Past Before Us
as his śiṣya (pupil). On one occasion, when the young man touches
his feet, he raises him up and calls him vatsa, an affectionate term
for a child. Others address the young prince respectfully as ārya-
deva (noble lord), or deva (lord). When all is in order at the end
of the play, Cāṇakya calls Candragupta, rājan (king). Admittedly,
the depiction of Candragupta in the play is prior to Candragupta
becoming king, when he is still under the tutelage of Cāṇakya;
but it is a far cry from the familiar projection of Indian kings as
absolute monarchs and despots.
As a commentary on politics, the play borrowed much from
the Arthaśāstra, and this is reflected in the snake-charmer’s dis-
course: those who understand the function of administration and
diplomacy can handle both snakes and kings. If, as a royal servant,
one is given authority, it is like holding a snake but without know-
ing the right spells with which to control it; therefore holding it
presages death. But in the play the royals are the innocents and
the ministers are the snakes. Sovereignty—Śrī—is fickle and goes
from one to another like a harlot.27 A commentary on court hierar-
chy, moving from the king via the ministers to fawning favourites
competing for small handouts, is said to be a dog’s life. The court
chamberlain speaks of some who flatter the king until they tire out,
and others who are free of this and treat the king like straw.28 He
then himself proceeds to flatter the king as only chamberlains can.
Given the ways of Cāṇakya, there is some irony in the statement
made by a spectator to the effect that in the realm of Candragupta
there is no tyranny, indicating also an awareness of the possibility
of political tyranny.
The Mudrārākṣasa reflects historical consciousness and is
aware of the historical tradition. Viśākhadatta is basically pro-
jecting history in a form different from the forms used earlier to
project the past; and the form he chooses is not what we today
would call historical writing. His is an attempt to capture an itihāsa
reconstructed from various traditions. The effort is not free of
historical anachronisms. There are references to items, objects,
and concepts that betray a period well after the Mauryas. The
27 Act 2, v. 6–7.
28 Act 3, vv. 14–16.
History as Literature: The Plays of Viśākhadatta 375
signet-ring and the term for an underground tunnel—suraṅga—
generally thought to have been derived from the Greek, syrinx,
are probably from Indo-Greek times just prior to the Christian
era. The references to the kāyasthas as a caste of scribes, as also
to the Kali age, would again be post-Mauryan. This would also
apply to the list of kings outside the realm of the Nandas, a list
more likely in later times, when such persons are mentioned. In
suggesting likely allies, the author seems to be confusing the past
with the present. Nevertheless, Viśākhadatta is aware that he is
writing on an event that has happened in the distant past and is
providing an explanation for it.
8. Commenting on the Play
An assessment of the play as providing historical consciousness
can also consider how the play and the event it tries to capture
are treated in texts later than the play, even if such texts are often
concerned mainly with literary theory. References to the play,
commentaries on the characters of the play, and versions of the
stories increase from the tenth century ad. They often incorporate
a retelling of the story, but with variants that make it more fictional
than the play. There is a sense in which this later period is looking
back on the earlier one, even if the more important discussions
relate to its observance of the rules of dramaturgy (and some make
a passing reference to the historical event that it dramatizes).
The Jaina interest in the story was in part because of the claim
that Candragupta became a Jaina in later years, although this idea
is discussed in a late Jaina text—Hemacandra’s Pariśiṣṭaparvan.29
The focus is on the threat of the frontier kings to the Nanda king-
dom, perhaps reflecting current politics. A twelfth-century Jaina
version conflates narratives from Buddhist sources but retells the
story more in keeping with contemporary views of what might
have happened. Inevitably, in one version Cāṇakya becomes a
Jaina monk, which is an ironical twist to the story.
The retellings in the eleventh century Somadeva’s Kathāsarit-
sāgara and Kṣemendra’s Bṛhatkathāmañjari are so changed as to be
29 VIII.415ff.
376 The Past Before Us
barely recognizable. From the fourteenth century, commentators
again retold the story, but in variant form. A major commentary
is included in the writings of Dhundirāja at the court of Serfoji in
Tanjore in the eighteenth century. He reversed the story in some
ways, although the protagonists remained the same. Candragupta
is insulted by the Nanda king so the young man swears revenge
and teams up with Cāṇakya to overthrow the Nandas. Here the
initiative is with Candragupta.30 Dhundirāja’s evaluation was that
the play belonged to the category known as prakhyāta—which
meant that it was derived from itihāsa. But unfortunately he does
not elaborate on this. The events were by now familiar, hence the
interest both in the stories and the play. Drama makes history more
visible and the question of historicity surfaces, although perhaps
not so frontally in those pre-modern times.
In later times, then, the play was recognized for its literary
merit, but because reference was also made to various versions of
the narrative, it came to be seen as a representation of the past.
Was there an attempt to consciously look at the past given that,
by now, literary genres and inscriptions were incorporating refer-
ences to the past?
How historical then is the Mudrārākṣasa? Does it embody a
kind of collective memory, or is it a narrative reconstructed from
various traditions with an underlying sense of history? It can
perhaps be said that within the framework of the tradition, the
Mudrārākṣasa kept alive an interest in the Nanda-Maurya transi-
tion, a significant historical event. Both plays by Viśākhadatta
evoke a perspective of the past which draws attention to the
historical, rather than being entirely fictional, even though the
form is a part of creative literature. To that extent, Viśākhadatta
seems to represent the Gupta interest in what went before. What
is equally significant is that the literati of the time were reading
30 G.V. Devasthali, Introduction to the Study of the Mudrārākṣasa, 161;
V. Raghavan, The Mudrārākṣasa of Mahādeva, 2. These issues are raised in the
Daśarūpāvaloka of Dhanika, the Śṛṅgāraprakāśa of Bhoja, and in Abhinavagup-
ta’s commentary on the Nāṭya-śāstra. Other texts, such as the Nītisāra, mention
that Kauṭilya terminated the rule of the Nandas, as does the Bṛhatkathāmañjari
of Kṣemendra.
History as Literature: The Plays of Viśākhadatta 377
texts of the Buddhist and Jaina historical tradition, whose narra-
tives were different from the brahmanical. Whether or not these
were incorporated in the literature that emerged, their presence
was recognized: and they might even have been viewed as an
alternative tradition.

PART IV
Alternative Histories

9
The Buddhist Tradition
Monks as Historians
1. Buddhist Historical Traditions:
The Background
The Buddhist and Jaina constructions of the past are strikingly
different from the Puranic, and they are different in many
ways—in their genres, in the initial languages used, and,
more importantly, in the intentions of the authors. There is a con-
cern for a reasonably acceptable chronology and a well-defined
ideological purpose in the historical account. These historical tra-
ditions are an alternative to the Puranic. Jaina narratives too of the
first millennium ad reflect a different presentation of events and
persons from that of the Puranic, even when the genre is similar.
An example of this difference, within an earlier text, is, as we have
seen, the Jaina version of the rāma-kathā.1 To demonstrate the
contrast with the Puranic, the focus now will be on Buddhist at-
tempts to write histories.
A multiplicity of reasons account for the difference: the Buddha
was a historical person whose life was seen by Buddhists not only
as ethically exemplary but also as a turning point in history. His
teachings were at first scattered and derived from what his disci-
ples remembered, but with the impressive growth of a following
1 As discussed in Chapter 5.
382 The Past Before Us
the teachings had to be organized into canonical texts. Those
maximally committed to the teaching became monks and were
instituted into an order—the Saṅgha. This innovation, the coming
into being of such orders among various renunciatory sects, had
not existed earlier to the same degree. Events that led to the struc-
turing of the Saṅgha had to be recorded. This was done through
periodic meetings of monks who debated the teaching and its in-
terpretation. This led to sectarian splits with each dissenting group
recording its own version of this history. The histories therefore
were similar up to a point, but registered divergence.
Dating to the mid first millennium bc, Buddhism and Jainism
differed from Vedic Brahmanism. They emerged at a time when
polities in northern India consisted of gaṇa-saṅghas (oligarchies/
chiefships), and rājyas (kingdoms), their essential differences occa-
sionally leading to confrontations. The oral tradition underlying
these groups coexisted. Fragmentary narratives about characters
from the epics occur in Buddhist and Jaina texts, but their activi-
ties are dissimilar.
Buddhist texts from the late first millennium bc to the early
centuries ad frequently refer to kings ruling in Magadha and
Kosala in the middle Ganges plain, and to the gaṇa-saṅghas of
the region, associating them with the Buddha. Two kings, Bimbi-
sāra and his son Ajātaśatru/Ajātasattu ruling in Magadha, and
Prasenajit/Pasenadi in Kosala, are said to be contemporaries of
the Buddha, with their capitals at Rājagṛha/Rājagaha and Śrāvasti.
The contemporary Vṛjji/Vajji confederacy of eight clans had its
centre at Vaiśāli and among them was the Jñātrika clan, to which
Mahāvīra belonged. Ajātaśatru campaigned at length against the
Vṛjjis and finally won by sowing dissension among the clans.
This confrontation was clearly important and was described in
the Canon.2
The chiefships gradually succumbed to the kingdoms that
were emerging as the new and effective form of government. The
Śiśunāgas were succeeded by the Nandas, who ruled over a major
part of the plain. The last Nanda king gave way to the Mauryas,
c. 321 to 180 bc, who consolidated most of the subcontinent
2 Mahāparinibbāna-sutta, Dīgha-nikāya, II.72.
The Buddhist Tradition: Monks as Historians 383
into their empire. Starting with Candragupta, the next king was
Bindusāra, and then came Aśoka, after whom the succession is not
listed uniformly. From the Buddhist perspective the great patron
and monarch was Aśoka.
The Buddha came from a clan-based chiefdom and approved of
this form of polity, and his teaching was primarily but not exclu-
sively in an urban context. Broad discussions of a philosophical
nature are said to have been held in parks on the edge of towns—
the kutūhala-sālās, literally, “places for raising curiosity”.3 Many
of the new ideas that challenged Vedic orthodoxy were part of
the urban experience, discussed at the courts of rājās, as the
Upaniṣads inform us. The recitation of Vedic texts in towns was
discouraged, perhaps because there was the danger of their being
reviled.4 Given the large number of heterodox sects, the competi-
tion was intense and ideologies had to be distinctive. Rival sects
even among śramaṇas are mentioned in the Buddhist Canon and
in the inscriptions of Aśoka.5 This doubtless required that the
teaching, especially of peripatetic teachers, be recorded.
Śramaṇas, distanced from orthodoxy, are referred to as exist-
ing even in earlier times as individual thinkers. They denied the
sanctity of Vedic rituals and of deities in general. Their preference
was for the teachings of human authors. What they did have in
common was the belief in karma (actions) associated with samsāra
(rebirth), although even in this the Buddhists questioned the exis-
tence of an eternal soul (ātman). For some the only reality was
the material world. The term śramaṇa derived from *śram, “to
labour”, points to the requirement for attaining liberation from
rebirth—mokṣa or nirvāṇa.
Groups of śramaṇas as monks could organize themselves un-
der a teacher and constitute an assembly, a Saṅgha. They regard-
ed themselves as outside the social code, maintaining their own
laws and regulations, with prescribed punishments for indiscipline.
It was a community within the larger society but somewhat
3 Dīgha-nikāya, 1.78–9, 3.36.
4 Āpastamba Dharmasūtra, 1.11.32.21, 1.3.9.4; Gautama Dharmasūtra, 2.7.45,
16.45.
5 Dīgha-nikāya, 2.151; Sutta-nipāta, 5.381; Schism Edict of Aśoka, in Bloch,
Les Inscriptions d’Aśoka, 152ff.
384 The Past Before Us
apart. Converting sectarian identities into an institution could lead
to dissidence, which in turn encouraged hostility. That the indi-
vidual renunciate remained conspicuous is evident even from the
Indica of Megasthenes, a work purporting to describe Mauryan
India.6
Monkhood grew out of the acceptance of asceticism and renun-
ciation, as a solution to the ills of life, which required opting out
of the mundane way of life and becoming a renunciate. Asceticism
and renunciation are not identical. The former required isolation
in order to contemplate the world and the self. The latter permit-
ted the creating of a community of the like-minded who lived
together in monasteries and convents, pursuing their reflections
on life without totally discounting all else. Living at the edge of
settle ments, such groups became a part of society but remained
distinctive.
Monks were dependent on alms for food and donations for the
monastery, hence the location of monasteries on the peripheries
of towns, on trade routes, and in fertile agricultural areas. Monks,
not being ascetics, made some minimal demands on society and in
return assisted the lay follower to acquire the merit so necessary
to enlightenment.
When monasteries became institutions, their records had to be
kept. This meant statements on the veracity and validity of the
origi nal teacher, together with some biographical information as
proof. How and why the Saṅgha was formed and its relationship
with society provided a history to the foundation of the sect. The
relation with society was significant in the light of two innova-
tions. One was the permission given to women to join the Saṅgha
through the establishment of convents, whereas previously, al-
though not unknown, it had been rare for women to leave home
and become renunciants.7 The second was the accepting of gifts
from lay followers—especially when the gifts helped in building
places of worship. The donation, whether in kind or coin, had to
6 Megasthenes, Frag. XLI, and Strabo, XV.1.58–60, in J.W. McCrindle (trans.),
Arrian’s Indica: Ancient India as Described by Megasthenes and Arrian.
7 E.g., the paribbājakas, mentioned in Majjhima-nikāya, 1.305; Saṃyutta-
nikāya, 3.238ff.; Megasthenes, Frag. XLI.60.
The Buddhist Tradition: Monks as Historians 385
be recorded as an act of merit. Buddhist and Jaina votive inscrip-
tions are among the earliest. Gradually, the merit could even be
transferred to those whom the donor wished to benefit.
This therefore is a different story from the lists of lineages,
heroes, and royal pedigrees of the Purāṇas. The Buddhist record,
although not invariably reliable, did have the semblance of a more
historical form than, for example, the narratives of the epics.
Records of donations from royal families and the heads of clans
added to the authority of the Saṅgha.
The Buddhist construction of the past has elements of the itihāsa-
purāṇa tradition in its earliest narratives, but subsequently there
is a marked change in the record of the history of Buddhism and
of its institutions. The nature of royal power, the kind of social
ethic propagated, and the perceived relationship between Budd-
hist ideology and political and social authority meant that the
persons and events highlighted were not the same as those in the
Purāṇas. Buddhist versions of segments of the Indian past have
been recorded in various categories of texts, such as in the Bud-
dhist Canon in Pāli, in the later Chronicles of Sri Lanka together
with their later commentaries, and in biographies of the Buddha
which were more frequent in the Mahāyāna tradition of north-
western India. Chronicles from Tibet and Ladakh dating to the
second millennium ad, though including some narratives on the
Indian past, focus on the history of Buddhism in the specific area.
An attempt will be made here to discuss some representative texts
that constituted a Buddhist historical tradition.
Although perceptions of the past derive from Buddhist religious
concerns, the relation with political authority and reflections on
society become the more imminent connections. There is therefore
an interface with history, both as a record to be cited as well as a
source of legitimation. The claim to factual material is introduced
to strengthen sectarian authority, characteristic of many monastic
chronicles. A historical perspective is suggested in various ways—
in narrating the activities of the Buddha, believed to be factual; in
explaining how the Saṅgha came about; in listing the various sects
that emerged from the original organization; and narrating the
relationship of the Saṅgha with the ruler. The question of whether
they can be called histories has been debated and a number of
386 The Past Before Us
questions have been asked pertaining to the early compositions
and how the contradictions between sects encouraged writing
history from a sectarian perspective.8
2. The Texts of the Canon
The systematizing of knowledge in a literary form was a prelimi -
nary step to organizing an assembly of followers. The better-
en dowed monasteries became centres of learning, apart from
propagating sectarian religion. Written texts facilitated a discipline
of learning. With this, both hermeneutics and exegesis became a
major part of scholarship and of the Canonical record. The texts
also provided some institutional continuity. The record of endow-
ments, concessions, and privileges would have required an inter-
action with patrons, who were functionaries of the state, private
householders together with their kinsfolk, and monks and nuns. As
a property holder the Saṅgha had to train monks in administrative
functions, and doubtless this required a sympathetic relationship
with the local bureaucracy.
A number and variety of texts go into the making of the Budd-
hist Canon, which becomes the base for the emergence of a histori-
cal tradition, aspects of which are discussed here with reference
to the texts listed below.
The teachings of the Buddha, originally probably recalled as an
oral tradition, were gradually organized into a format composed
in Pāli and referred to as the Pāli Buddhist Canon. The Buddha
used the commonly understood Ardha-Māgadhi, closely related
to Pāli and the Prākrits, in preference to Sanskrit. Texts composed
in Prākrit and later in Sanskrit relate to other sects. Subsequent
to the death of the Buddha there was a fear of losing his teaching
and of indiscipline in the Saṅgha. The teaching had to be record-
ed, as also the regulations that governed the functioning of the
monas teries. This activity was controlled by the Elders—the
Theras. The sect that initially claimed eminence was the Thera-
vāda, which maintained that the Pāli Canon encapsulated the
origi nal teaching of the Buddha, a statement inevitably contested
by dissident sects.
8 C.W. Huntington, Jr., “History, Traditions and Truth,” 187–227; J.W. de
Jong, A Brief History of Buddhist Studies in Europe and America.
The Buddhist Tradition: Monks as Historians 387
The Pāli Canon was assembled from about the mid-first mil-
lennium bc and took a written form somewhat later. It consists
primarily of the three Piṭakas (baskets), but includes other related
texts. The three are:
1. The Vinaya Piṭaka, the text setting out the discipline and
rules to be observed in the monasteries. The Mahāvagga
section mentions rules which the Buddha expected monks to
follow, often backed by reference to the occasion when the
rule was formulated. This provided something of a historical
context. The Cullavagga section has scattered references to
events.
2. The Sutta Piṭaka is in some ways the more important, with
five nikāyas (collections) which develop on the essential
teaching of the Buddha and are crucial to the Canon. These
are the Dīgha-nikāya, Majjhima-nikāya, Saṃyutta-nikāya,
Aṅguttara-nikāya, and Khuddaka-nikāya. The last of these
includes the Dhammapada and the Sutta-nipāta.
Touching on the supposed previous lives of the Buddha
are the Jātakas, which are refurbished popular stories, and
the Buddhavaṃsa. The Jātakas indirectly reflect aspects of
the teaching and also on occasion concede a degree of dis-
sidence in the Saṅgha.
The Buddhavaṃsa is an attempt to create a legend of
the Buddha and of Buddhahood, as it were, apart from the
lineage of Gautama. He is not an isolated teacher but is
twenty-fifth in a succession of Buddhas, reminiscent of the
succession of teachers listed in the Vedas. His coming is a
historical event. The time of the earlier Buddhas goes back
to many kappas/kalpas (eons), but their descent is linear
and sequential. The focus being on succession, it has links
with later texts that carry the label of vaṃsas.
3. The Abhidhamma Piṭaka elaborates on and organizes the
teaching. It includes the Kathāvatthu, which has references
to some historical persons.
The format follows a system of a ready reference for the ques-
tions that arose about the teaching. Determining the original
Canon remains problematic, as also ascertaining the changes
introduced and their chronology. Segments within a larger text
388 The Past Before Us
could belong to an earlier period and therefore a single date for
the whole becomes uncertain. Information on polities, territories,
and societies, scattered in these texts, has been used to comment
on the history of these times.
In terms of a historical tradition, some distinction can be
made between the Canon and the later commentaries, notably the
Samanta-pāsādikā by Buddhaghosa on the Vinaya, or the Sumaṅ-
galavilāsinī, attributed to the same author, on the Dīgha Nikāya.
Commentaries are largely in the nature of clarifications, rectifica-
tions, and some editing of the text, all looking back at past events.
Commentaries become necessary when the accepted interpretation
of the original is questioned by dissidents within the Sramanic
tradition, or when the historical context has changed over a few
centureis, or when new explanations more in keeping with cur-
rent times are sought. The contestations could have been between
Buddhist and brahmanical views, as is evident in the Purāṇas.
Some of the commentaries are authored by brāhmaṇas converted
to Buddhism. The link between the text and the commentary is of
a historical nature, even if it is not actually history. Commentaries
on the Pāli Canon and related texts follow sooner than those on
texts of the Puranic tradition. The commentaries were frequently
in Siṅhala/Sihala, the language of an early preservation of parts of
the Canon. These were systematically collected and translated into
Pāli by about the mid-first millennium ad. These commentaries
were not merely glosses. Their explanations and elaborations in
looking back at past events went into the making of the historical
tradition. The Canonical writing will be discussed in this chapter,
the post-Canonical in subsequent chapters.
The post-Canonical texts of the Theravāda sect are, for our
purposes, primarily the Chronicles of the Mahāvihāra monastery
in Sri Lanka. These are the Dīpavaṃsa and the Mahāvaṃsa, both
dating to the mid-first millennium ad, and therefore later than the
Canonical texts. The commentary on the latter, the Vaṃsatt happa-
kāsinī, was written later. The Cūlavaṃsa continues the narrative of
the Mahāvaṃsa and covers a broad span of the subseq uent history
of Sri Lanka, also focussing on monastic history. These texts are
sometimes jointly referred to as the Ceylon Chronicles.
The post-Canonical texts of the Northern Buddhist tradition,
and as such distinct from the Theravāda, include biographies of
The Buddhist Tradition: Monks as Historians 389
the Buddha, initially written in the early first millennium ad. They
were therefore parallel in time to the narratives that went into the
making of the Ceylon Chronicles, but they were rooted in regions
distant from each other and used Gāndhārī Prākrit and Sanskrit
rather than Pāli. The subject of the biographies was the Buddha;
nevertheless, some biographical vignettes included the patrons of
the Saṅgha. The Buddhacarita of Aśvaghoṣa virtually initiated the
biographical form as an aspect of the past; also taken up in the
Mahāvastu and the Lalitavistara; and the Divyāvadāna, where a
few chapters, such as the Aśokāvadāna, narrate the glorious deeds
(as the term avadāna implies) of Aśoka.
The biography became a convenient form to use for teaching from
the early centuries ad, when Buddhist missions travelled to dis-
tant places. However, the biographies are not conspicuous in the
Sri Lankan Buddhist literature, and chronicles are relatively absent
in the early literature of the north-west.
The Buddhist Canon was an attempt at systematizing the teach-
ing. In the course of doing so, much is stated about the history of
the Saṅgha, the Elders, prominent lay followers, discourses of the
Buddha with kings and monks, some chronology of events, and
snippets of the Buddha biography.
3. The Dates of the Texts
Assessing these texts as reflecting a sense of history is problematic
since many are chronologically layered works, composed over a
span of time. Some sections are thought to be earlier compositions,
such as the gāthās and parts of the Nikāyas. Anthologies are by
definition the compositions of varied times, sometimes added to,
or even edited, over a longer period, although they may claim to be
chronologically specific. They are consequently later texts looking
back at earlier times. Themes claimed as historical are of interest.
The assessment is inevitably based not on the claims as much as
on what the texts convey of the histories of the earlier and later
societies, and whether there is a consciousness of change, and if
so whether there is an explanation for the change.
The chronological range therefore extends from the oral tra-
dition of the Buddha’s time, or just later, to the mid-first millen-
nium ad when commentaries begin to be written. The Buddhist
390 The Past Before Us
tradition seems to switch more consciously to a literate form, as
compared to the Puranic, which continues to show traces of the
oral. Nevertheless, initially, on the death of the Buddha, his teach-
ings were remembered, and only subsequently, from perhaps the
second century bc, did they start to be written.
The current controversy about the date of the Buddha affects
the dating of the texts.9 The Buddhist texts tend to use three dates
for the mahāparinirvāṇa: 544, 486/483 bc. The first of these
has limited use and is generally seen as an error of the eleventh
century ad in the Pāli texts, when an attempt was made to intro-
duce a sixty-year cycle to adjust the calendar. Apart from this,
either of the remaining two dates was regarded as established.
486 bc is based on the Dotted Record of Canton, where a dot was
marked on a manuscript kept at Canton on each anniversary of
the Buddha’s death. A long chronology and a short chronology
have been suggested, dating to 486 and 368 bc, thus introducing
another date.10 Recently, scholars have argued for various other
dates, some as late as the fourth century bc.11 Earlier, East Asian
scholars had also suggested alternative dates, either earlier or later
than the standard one.12 The date of Aśoka is firmly established by
his reference to the five yona rājās (Greek kings) in his Major
Rock Edict XIII. These were his contemporaries and their dates
are well established.13 The date of Aśoka’s edict is the mid-third
century bc, c. 256. This suggests the possibility of the Buddha’s
death dating to 486 bc.14
The firm association of the Buddha with the pre-Nanda kings,
and the absence of mention of the Nandas in the Pāli Canon,
9 P.H.L. Eggermont, The Chronology of the Reign of Aśoka Moriya,
132–43.
10 E. Lamotte, History of Indian Buddhism, 13–14.
11 H. Bechert (ed.), The Dating of the Historical Buddha, vols I–II; L.S.
Cousins, “The Dating of the Historical Buddha: A Review Article”, 57–63.
12 H. Nakamura, Indian Buddhism, 12–15.
13 J. Bloch, Les Inscriptions d’Asoka, 130ff.; R. Thapar, Aśoka and the Decline
of the Mauryas, 40–1.
14 The contemporary Hellenistic and Greek kings mentioned in the edict date
to c. 256–55 bc. It was issued twelve years into his reign. This would date his
accession to c. 268 bc. The Chronicle mentions his accession as 218 years after
the parinirvāṇa, which would give 483 bc.
The Buddhist Tradition: Monks as Historians 391
would support the earlier date. Given the propensity of the monks
to link the Saṅgha with royal patronage, it is hard to believe that,
had the Buddha been a contemporary of the powerful Nanda
king, the Canon and the subsequent biographies would not have
emphasized this association. The significant point is not so much
the variation in the dates suggested by modern scholars, but that
in the Buddhist texts chronology tends to conform to a plausible
date for the parinirvāṇa, generally 486/483 bc, and most events
are calculated from that date. The chronological ordering and
arrangement of the Canon remains problematic.15 The Canon
probably took its present form by the turn of the Christian era,
and provides the elements of what was later to go into the making
of the Buddhist historical tradition.
4. The Authors
The recalling and recitation of various texts continued into the
early centuries ad. The bhānakas, among others, were the monks
who preserved the oral recitation. Schismatic teachings could not
be excluded and were mentioned. Where texts were translated into
other languages, the inheritance of concepts from that language
would have left some imprint.16
The varied languages made the texts more appropriate to re-
gional dissemination but also encouraged alternative explanations
of passages that were difficult to comprehend. The Theravāda
maintained their record in Pāli, arguing that it was close to the
language in which the Buddha had taught, although the early texts
of Sri Lanka drew on a Siṅhala oral tradition.17 Sanskrit texts were
translated into the languages of the areas to which the Buddhist
missions travelled, such as Sogdian, Khotanese, Chinese, and
Tibetan. Occasionally these, in their survived form, are more
complete than the original.
15 G.C. Pande, Studies in the Origin of Buddhism, has attempted a stratifica-
tion of the nikāyas which demonstrates the chronological uncertainty of sections
of the texts.
16 J.W. de Jong, Buddha’s Word in China; E. Zurcher, The Buddhist Conquest
of China.
17 Other later sects kept their records in Sanskrit, Prākrit, and Apabhraṃśa
as well.
392 The Past Before Us
Unlike the itihāsa-purāṇa, the authorship in most cases is
neither that of bard nor brāhmaṇa, but usually of monks in
monastic establishments or learned lay followers. The perspective
is therefore not primarily of the court or the monarchy, but of the
monastery and the Saṅgha. Often placed on the edge of an urban
centre, these would also reflect the interaction with townspeople,
householders, and merchants. This did not exclude the politics of
the capital, except that the politics came filtered through monastic
concerns. Political authority is seen as central, but it is also viewed
from the perspective of the monastery, the sect, and the Saṅgha.
The premium on literacy among monks made it imperative that
the Canon, commentaries, and chronicles be copied at regular
intervals to ensure their preservation. The narrative was updated
either by interpolations, or by rewriting the text, or by writing a
fresh text, in each case using the existing ones as among the
sources. Later commentaries, not surprisingly, could give variant
readings, so changes can be noticed.
The Pāli Buddhist Canon reflects the concerns of the Saṅgha
subsequent to the death of the Buddha, when records were re-
quired. The oral tradition continued for a while, as is suggested
by references to teachings in the Aśokan edicts, which are not
always found in the Canon or which come under different names.
Orality would have been conducive to interpolations.18 The
Buddha explained what he was teaching in a face-to-face situation,
and this went back to his first forays into propagating his ideas.
The spoken word was respected but debated. The focus therefore
was on questioning and discussion, and, in these early stages, on
arguments deriving from logical thinking, and not from a believed
divine revelation.
5. Origin Myths
The seeds of the historical tradition are probably to be found in the
itihāsa-samvāda, the dialogue stories which were counterparts to
the dialogue hymns and narratives—the ākhyānas—of the Vedas,
but formulated here in a recognizably Buddhist idiom. These are
18 S. Collins, “Notes on Some Oral Aspects of Pāli Literature”, 121–36.
The Buddhist Tradition: Monks as Historians 393
to be found largely in the Nikāyas of the Sutta Piṭaka,19 narrated
in the course of explaining the beginnings of social institutions or
to illustrate aspects of the Buddhist doctrine. They tend to centre
on an event in the life of the Buddha, or a prominent disciple or
person, all couched in a frame of purposeful persuasion about
Buddhist teaching. In the early texts the Buddha biography is
so entwined in the history of the religion that separating them is
difficult.
The beginnings often go back to origin myths, not to be taken
as history, but rather as persistent myths that incorporate the social
assumptions of that society. In the Buddhist tradition there are
origin myths about utopian beginnings and there are fabricated
genealogies of the descent of clans. They provide a glimpse of
what was significant to the authors of the texts and became seminal
to later historical perspectives.
The primary myth narrates the origin of family, private owner-
ship of land, status, and political authority—a myth narrated in
what has been called the Buddhist book of genesis.20 The myth
is based on the recognition of social differentiation. When the
Buddha was asked about the origin of government, he explained
that initially there was a utopian condition where none laboured
and time was passed in leisure. There were no planets or stars,
no day or night, no gender, only self-luminous beings. Gradually,
this golden age began to tarnish, with the creeping in of evil.
The earth acquired colour and odour and tasted of honey and
ghī. People began to eat it and their luminosity diminished. The
planets appeared, so days were differentiated from nights and time
was measured. Physical differences made some people beautiful
and some ugly and this fostered vanity and conceit. Together
with this came sexual differences, which induced passion and
immorality and, above all, shame. Rice that had grown naturally
and replenished itself began to be hoarded, so a constant supply
needed cultivation, which in turn required labour. Stealing from
19 M. Winternitz, History of Indian Literature, vol. II, 34ff.; R. Thapar, “Origin
Myths and the Early Indian Historical Tradition”, in Cultural Pasts, 754–80.
20 Aggañña Sutta, in the Dīgha-nikāya, 3.80ff. and 3.93.21; T.W. Rhys Davids
and J.E. Carpenter (eds), Dialogues of the Buddha.
394 The Past Before Us
each other’s fields led to claims of ownership, so rice fields had to
be demarcated and allotted to different groups. Evil took the form
of desire and covetousness.
In an effort to control these negative features and curb desire,
families were established and segregated, but contentions conti-
nued. Individuals claiming ownership of fields treated property as
personal possessions. Ultimately, the situation became so chaotic
that everyone gathered and then elected one from among them,
the mahāsammata—the great elected one—in whom they invested
authority to make and enforce laws and protect property. As re-
compense for performing this unenviable task, they agreed to
give a percentage of their produce to him. He was called khattiya/
kṣatriya because he was the lord of the fields (khetta), and rājā
because he charmed everyone.
The mythic evocation of this past takes the form of an evolu-
tionary process. The story separates the time between common
ownership of land and the subsequent private ownership, the latter
situation accelerating disputes and disequilibrium. The crux of
the story relates to two areas of kṣatriya interest—landownership
and the exercise of political authority. It emphasizes the election
of the ruler and subsumes a contractual relationship. The person
so elected had to be pure in descent for seven generations, which
circumscribed the choice.21 The origin of the kṣatriya was thus
merged with rulership. It seemed necessary to narrate the evolu-
tion of clans into more complex societies in a seemingly historical
fashion. The myths are not tangential to the narratives, nor are
the narratives lost sight of in the myths. This significant historical
change, from an egalitarian society to a hierarchical society which
introduced government and the dominant status of the kṣatriya,
was not divinely ordained but contracted by the people. Deities
are absent and the explanation is based on causality and logic,
conducive to viewing the past historically.
The origin myths of kṣatriya clans occur frequently. Included
in these is the founding of the city, associated with a particular
21 Kuṭṭadanta-sutta, Dīgha-nikāya, 1.137.13.; Aṅguttara-nikāya, 1.163;
Aṅguttara Nikāya, ed. R. Morris and E. Hardy, 5 vols; F.W. Woodward and E.M.
Hare (trans.), The Book of Gradual Sayings.
The Buddhist Tradition: Monks as Historians 395
janapada or territory of the clan, as for example that of the Śākyas,
Koliyas, and Licchavis. The Śākyas were especially important,
being the clan of the Buddha, and in some versions of the myth
intermarried with the Koliyas. The Licchavis were a part of the
powerful Vṛjji confederacy and an obstacle to the increasing
strength of the kingdom of Magadha. The Vṛjjis resisted the
transition to monarchy, a transition which was taking place all
around them.
The long excursus on the origin of the Śākyas takes in a sub-
stantial part of the Buddhist construction of origins. The context
is that of a brāhmaṇa disputing the social status of the Buddha, a
contention not uncommon in brahmanical circles. The intention
may also have been to dismiss the view that Buddhist teaching was
attractive only to those of low status. There are marginal varia-
tions in the accounts of origins, but the main lines of the story
are broadly similar. The genealogical mode of historical thinking,
also used in the epics and Purāṇas, is evident, although the lists
of descent may differ.
The Śākyas are traced back to the lineage of Okkāka.22 He had
five sons and four daughters, but on the death of his queen his new
wife also bore him a son. He was afraid she might harm the child-
ren of the first wife as she wanted her son to succeed, so he was
persuaded to exile his older children.23 The nine of them travelled
to the Himalayan foothills. Here they met the sage Kapila, who
advised them to build a city and settle there. The city so founded
was called Kapilavastu in honour of the sage. The eldest brother
remained unmarried while the other four married their four sisters;
and from them was descended the clan of the Śākyas.
Okkāka is the Pāli for Ikṣvāku, but the story differs from that
of Ikṣvāku in the Purāṇas. An Ikṣvāku ancestry was possibly an
22 Ambaṭṭha-sutta, Dīgha-nikāya, 1.92.16; D. Andersen and H. Smith, The
Sutta-nipāta, 420ff.; K.R. Norman (trans.), The Rhinoceros Horn and other
Early Buddhist Poems (Sutta-nipāta); Sumaṅgalavilāsinī, vol. I, 258–60; T.W.
Rhys Davids and J.E. Carpenter, The Sumaṅgalavilāsinī, vols I and II. There is
a variation on this in the Mahāvastu, vol. I, 348–52.
23 This is a stereotype narrative and occurs at the start of the rāma-kathā in
the Dasaratha Jātaka.
396 The Past Before Us
attempt to appropriate a known ancestral figure. The gloss on
Okkāka in a later commentary is that when he spoke a light like
fire came out of his mouth.24 This is reminiscent of the Vedic
description of the rājā Videgha Māthava who carried Agni in his
mouth and, when invoked, Agni flashed out of the rājā’s mouth
and burnt a path purifying the land eastwards to the river Sadānīra
where Videgha Māthava settled.25 The Śākyas are said to have
settled in the same area.
A later version of the myth reverses the story somewhat and
states that the Śākyas had a close relationship with the Koliyas.26
The Śākyas consisted of five sisters and four brothers. The eldest
sister was appointed to the role of mother, the remaining eight
paired off. The eldest sister developed leprosy and was left in
another part of the forest, where she was rescued by a rājā who
was also exiled because of leprosy but who had cured himself.
He cured her too and they were married. They built a city at the
site of a kol tree, hence the name Koliya. They sent their sixteen
pairs of twin sons to Kapilavastu to marry the daughters of their
maternal uncles. The young men kidnapped the Śākya women
and were not prevented from doing so since they were kinsmen
(cross-cousins). The settlements of the Koliyas and the Śākyas
were separated by a river.27
The myth in each case attempts to explain the origin of a clan,
and the city associated with its janapada (territory). From the
fifth century bc, such cities were hubs of political and economic
activity.28 The city as the residence of the ruling families of the
clan was virtually coterminous with the identity of the janapada.
The attempt to explain the name of the clan is striking, if only
because the etymologies are false. The original was either forgot-
ten or lost, or disguised if it indicated a socially less respectable
group, and new ones had to approximate the sound of the word
in Indo-Aryan. This would also account for varied explanations,
24 Sumaṅgalavilāsinī, I.258.
25 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 1.4.1.10–17.
26 Sumaṅgalavilāsinī, I.260ff.
27 Kunāla Jātaka, ed. and trans. W.B. Bollee.
28 R. Thapar, From Lineage to State, 79ff.
The Buddhist Tradition: Monks as Historians 397
as for example the name Śākya being derived from *śak (to be
able), or from the śaka/śakota tree.
The kṣatriya families had origin myths and the right to be re-
presented in the santhāgāra (assembly hall). The kṣatriya members
of these janapadas were sometimes related and their territories
lay in geographical proximity. The genesis of the dynasties ruling
in the neighbouring kingdoms of Magadha and Kosala is not the
subject of myths, even though the Buddha is said to have preached
in these areas and was received with honour by their kings.
The insistence on siblings, or, even better, sibling twins, as the
procreators of the clan is necessary to arguing for the purity of
lineage, tracing it back to those of identical blood. It is unlikely
to have been meant literally. Marriages of sibling twins would
be the closest simulation of a utopia where humans were born as
couples, a condition equally familiar to brāhmaṇa utopias. Sixteen
pairs make a special number, namely, 2 x 2 x 2 x 2, where the base
of 2 would again convey the sense of a twin. Sibling incest was
also a symbolic form of social demarcation, where those of high
social status had a marriage pattern which was denied to those of
lesser status. It suggests a diffusion of power within a small social
group, as distinct from the larger clan. The concept is known to
other cultures.29
In other situations the preference is for cross-cousin marriage.30
In the non-Buddhist tradition, by contrast, even this is on occasion
doubted or treated with contempt.31 Brahmanical texts quote it
as a customary practice in the South.32 In northern India it may
reflect an earlier substratum culture later overlaid by dharmaśāstra
29 H.A. Hoffner, “History and Historians of the Ancient Near East: The
Hittites”, 290. The queen of Kanesh/Kultepe bore thirty sons in one year, whom
she placed in baskets and floated down the river. They were reared by the gods.
She then bore thirty daughters in one year but kept them. The sons eventually
came to Kanesh and married their sisters. In this version, however, the sons
were not recognized as brothers.
30 J. Silk, “Incestuous Ancestors: The Family Origins of Gautama Siddhartha,
Abraham and Sarah in Genesis 20.12”, 253–81.
31 Bhāgavata Purāṇa, 10.54.18. Rāma and Sītā as siblings, ruling as consorts
in the Dasaratha Jātaka, was unacceptable to the brahmanical tradition.
32 P.V. Kane, History of the Dharmasastras, vol. II, pt 1, 460ff.
398 The Past Before Us
norms. Or else it may have been routinely adopted in many texts
that were composed in societies where cross-cousin marriage was
the current pattern, as in Sri Lanka.33
The kṣatriya status of the clan is explicit by the origin always
being from an established royal family, often of the Sūryavaṃśa.
Kinship helped establish rights in landownership and, ultimately,
political authority. The repeated theme of exile would either point
to there being dissident groups or else segments breaking away
from the clan and migrating elsewhere to establish new settle-
ments. These myths could also reflect local families, not neces-
sarily immigrants, who, having come to power, sought links with
the more established families of the middle Ganges plain, as was
to be frequent in later centuries. Myths claimed to establish social
links, legitimacy of succession, the possible migration of important
groups, and the social status to those who had acquired political
power. Migration, sometimes disguised as exile, can be used to
assert the rights and priority of a particular group over a specific
region. This assumed significance in periods when new groups
were moving in as entrepreneurs in either previously occupied
areas or newly opened lands.
That there was some discord between the brahmanical and
Buddhist traditions is evident from the Buddhist insistence on the
kṣatriya status of these clans. Most are not listed in the Puranic
descent lists. If it was merely a question of discounting those who
were the fountainhead of heterodox movements, then surely the
Puranic genealogies would have deliberately included them and
described them as either vrātya-kṣatriyas (degenerate kṣatriyas)
or as śūdras—as they did some early dynasties.34 The Śākyas
are listed among the Sūryavaṃśa, although elsewhere in the
Viṣṇu Purāṇa the Buddha is reviled for opposing Vedic belief
and ritual.35 The use of a similar origin myth in more than one
instance may have been deliberate—to emphasize their distinctive
culture and exclusivity, which separated them from the janapadas
observing brahmanical norms. The myth in this case becomes an
alternative view of the past.
33 T. Trautmann, Dravidian Kinship, 316ff.
34 Manu’s Code of Law, 10.22, refers to the Licchavis as vrātya-kṣatriyas.
35 R. Thapar, “The Purāṇas: Heresy and the Vaṃśānucarita”, 28–48.
The Buddhist Tradition: Monks as Historians 399
The origins of castes were explained in a manner similar to the
evolution of rulership and the pre-eminence of the kṣatriyas. The
brāhmaṇas lived a simple life on the edge of forests and settle-
ments, reciting the Vedas. The vessa/vaiśyas, as householders, took
to various professions. Those that pursued the lowest occupations,
such as hunting, were the sudda/śūdras. Caste was a human in-
vention, as was governance, and required no divine intervention.
The bhikṣu/bhikkhu (monk) could be from any group since caste
identity was discarded in the homeless state. The bhikkhu was
closer to freedom from rebirth than the upāsaka (lay follower).
The Buddhavaṃsa in a sense runs parallel to this material but
focusing on Gautama Buddha in a succession of earlier Buddhas.
History in the Buddhavaṃsa logically terminates with Gautama.
The next step requires a history of his teaching and the institu-
tion through which the teaching was established, the Saṅgha. This
moves us to other texts.
6. Early History of the Saṅgha
The Piṭakas were claimed as an authentic record of the teachings
of the Buddha, collated after his passing away and approved of in
the course of discussions held at three Councils at different places
and times. The Councils were not descriptions of contemporary
events but a record of what was remembered as the earlier his-
tory of the doctrine and the instituting of the Saṅgha. The Budd -
hist perception of the past moves from origin myths to events
claimed as historical and essential to the history of the Saṅgha. The
Vinaya Piṭaka, in discussing monastic rules and moral discipline,
describes the formation of the Buddhist community. Events are
given a chronology.36 Dissident sects, as they grew in importance,
tended to reformulate the Vinaya to their own ideas, the alterations
being largely disagreements with the Pāli Theravāda Canon.
The history of the various Councils is narrated in the Vinaya
Piṭaka. The recording of the doctrine begins with the First Council
of the Saṅgha, held at Rājagṛha soon after the Buddha’s demise.
36 H. Oldenberg (ed.), Vinaya Piṭakam, vol. 5, 284; I.B. Horner, trans., The
Book of the Discipline, 6 vols; T.W. Rhys Davids and H. Oldenberg, Vinaya Texts;
Cullavagga XI, XII, in Vinaya Piṭaka, vol. III, 370ff.
400 The Past Before Us
Two disciples, Ānanda and Upāli, recited the Piṭakas, which were
then recorded.37 The authority of Kassapa, who claims to have
been present at the Buddha’s death, is invoked. It is thought that
this Council had a nucleus of authentic tradition,38 and was held to
collect and organize the teaching and guide the Saṅgha. The ela-
boration of this doctrine was to change with the emergence of new
sects, but the Vinaya was relatively constant. The Abhidhamma
Piṭaka, more centrally concerned with doctrinal matters, may have
been recorded later. The rules of monastic functioning, necessary
to the discipline of the monastery, had to conform to what was
stated by the Buddha, where and why, and to whom. Inevitably,
there were some differences in what was reported.
The Canon has references to the Buddha’s admiration for
the oligarchies.39 When Magadha attacks the Vajji confederacy,
the Buddha states that the unity of the Vajjis depends on their
assembling regularly, honouring the Elders and established laws,
respecting existing shrines, avoiding misconduct against women,
and welcoming new teachers. These are also necessary for the wel -
fare and future existence of the Saṅgha, the organization of which
he modelled on the gaṇa-saṅgha system of chiefships to ensure
the Saṅgha would have been relatively democratic in its function-
ing. However, its existence required it to be authoritarian. The
later commentaries on the Vinaya Piṭaka provide material on the
schismatic trends within the Saṅgha and the resulting sects, which,
by the early centuries ad, were said to number at least eighteen,
frequently a symbolic number in Indian lists.
A Second Council was held a century later at Vaiśāli.40 Kings
are associated as patrons with the Councils, Ajātaśatru with
Rājagaha, and a Nanda king with Vaiśāli.41 This links the Saṅgha to
political authority, and incidentally dates the Buddha to pre-Nanda
37 L. de la Vallee Poussin, The Buddhist Councils (trans.); A.K. Warder,
Indian Buddhism, 201ff.
38 L. de la Vallee Poussin, The Buddhist Councils, 25ff.
39 Dīgha-nikāya, vol. II, 73ff; T.W. Rhys Davids and J.E. Carpenter (eds),
The Dīgha Nikāya; T.W. and C.A.F. Rhys Davids (trans.), The Dialogues of the
Buddha, 3 vols.
40 L. de la Vallee Poussin, The Buddhist Councils, 30ff.
41 E. Lamotte, History of Indian Buddhism (trans.), 139ff.
The Buddhist Tradition: Monks as Historians 401
times. Dissension surfaced among the monks at the Vaiśāli Coun-
cil, especially on the crucial question of whether monks could
accept donations of money. The monks of Vaiśāli, who favoured
monetary donations, differed sharply from those who came from
the more western monasteries, such as Kauśāmbī and Mathura,
and who were opposed to such donations. The issue was referred
to a committee which decided that monetary donations were un-
acceptable. Regulations about food and drink, seating protocol,
rituals, and monastic procedures were also contentious. Problems
in the routine organization of monastic life needed sorting out.
Eventually there was a split in the Saṅgha.
According to the Theravāda tradition, 136 years later a Third
Council was held at Pāṭaliputra, the capital of the Mauryan empire
and was associated with the Mauryan king Aśoka, in c. 250 bc.
The link between the Saṅgha and political authority now stands
out. The famous Schism Edict of Aśoka calls for the expulsion
of dissident monks and nuns and thus confirms dissidence.42 The
Theravāda unsurprisingly claimed that it represented the orthodox
core of the doctrine, but this was unacceptable to other sects.
A schism in the doctrine was recognized. The majority of
the monks came to be called the Mahāsaṅghika, and the minor-
ity, apparently largely the Elders, were called the Sthaviravāda/
Thera vāda. Since the record of this Council comes only from
the Theravāda tradition, it has been seen as a possible attempt to
legitimize the priority and authority given to Theravāda teaching
in its texts. Other sects of what came to be called the Northern
Buddhist tradition speak in some cases of another Council being
held in Kashmir as late as the first century ad, during the reign of
the Kuṣāṇa king Kaniṣka. Once again, the association was with the
most powerful king of the time. The locations of the Councils were
cities linked to politically powerful patrons. There is logic in the
need for calling Councils and recording decisions in accordance
with the perspectives of particular Saṅghas. The attempt is to give
historicity to the Councils and their decisions. This was quite un-
like the Puranic sects, which had little in the way of an institutional
base at this point and were not concerned with historicity.
42 J. Bloch, Les Inscriptions d’Asoka, 152ff.
402 The Past Before Us
The division of the Saṅgha into sects was not the final identity
of the splinter groups, for each in time was further segmented.
The organizational form of Buddhism was not that of a centrally
controlled uniform religion, but of sects breaking away and re-
cording their interpretation of the Canon.
The schismatic movement, explained as due to doctrinal dif-
ferences, was also related to the rapid spread of Buddhism, which
made it difficult to consolidate the dispersed groups. Further, the
preaching of the religion in new areas inevitably led to problematic
assimilation of local belief and practice. The dispersal of sects takes
a regional and geographical focus. The earlier Theravāda claims
strength in Magadha, from where it is said to have sent missions
not only to other parts of the subcontinent but also to Sri Lanka and
Hellenistic West Asia. The Sarvāstivāda was more visible in the
region of Mathura and Kashmir. Multiple sectarian fissions were
sought to be kept under some control when the overarching reli-
gion of Buddhism was bifurcated into the Hīnayāna or Lesser
Vehicle (of which the Theravādins were a part), and the Mahāyāna
or Greater Vehicle which associated the Sarvāstivādins among
other sects.43 Schisms required a record of a historical kind to
justify the existence of those claiming to be the inheritors.
7. Kingship, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha
In the itihāsa-purāṇa tradition, the right by which the king rules
lies in the concept of rājadharma—how the king is meant to prac-
tice the dharma. The Buddhist tradition introduces another aspect
in this relationship, that of the king’s relation to the Saṅgha. The
Saṅgha is largely only a way of assisting in the practice of dhamma
and therefore is subordinate to the dhamma. Nevertheless, it was
a clearly defined institutional aspect of dhamma.
43 Mahāyāna, literally, “the greater vehicle”, and Hīnayāna, “the lesser
vehicle”, together with the Vajrayāna, or “vehicle of the thunderbolt”, were the
three major schools of Buddhism. Eventually the Hīnayāna was associated with
Sri Lanka and South East Asia and parts of India. Mahāyāna spread in central
and eastern Asia and in some parts of India. The Vajrayāna, which emerged
later, remained popular in eastern India and Tibet.
The Buddhist Tradition: Monks as Historians 403
The Pāli Canon mentions the conversations of the Buddha
with people in many cities where he preached, such as Rājagṛha,
Vaiśāli, Śrāvasti, Campā, Kauśāmbī, Kuśināra, Kapilavastu, and
Vārānasi. The mention of Pāṭaligāma is of historical interest as
this site was later to develop into Pāṭaliputra—the capital of the
Nandas and the Mauryas. At Pāṭaligāma a town is being built as
a defence against the Vajjis. Here the Buddha addresses lay fol-
lowers who have gathered. Elsewhere, and later it would seem, a
monastery is located at Pāṭaliputra, the town presumably having
been settled by now.44
The conversations were with a range of people—monks, house-
holders representing the lay followers or the community at large,
heads of clans and kings. Of the latter, those more frequently
mentioned are Bimbisāra of Magadha and his son and succes-
sor Ajātaśatru, and Pasenadi of Kosala. Mention is also made of
the minister significantly named Vassakara—literally, “the rain-
maker”—who was sent by the Magadhan king to live among the
Vajjis and sow dissension between the clans. This he succeeded in
doing, and the kingdom of Magadha was able to finally conquer the
gaṇa-saṅgha of the Vajjis. Sowing dissension among confedera-
cies in order to weaken them is also advised by Kauṭilya.45
Kings were the most prestigious category to whom the Buddha
preached. Although kingship was a relatively new polity, its po-
tential was being recognized and there are descriptions of the ideal
king, the cakkavatti. These descriptions point to a difference from
the brahmanical view of kingship. The king’s prime possessions
were seven precious objects of sovereignty: the wheel, elephant,
horse, gemstone, woman, householder, and councillor, symbolic
of law, royalty, force, wealth, fertility, work, and advice. Of all
these, the wheel was crucial and enabled the king, if he governed
wisely, to become a cakkavatti—a universal monarch.46 The cak-
kavatti’s power was so extensive that only one could rule at a time,
and because he is a dhamma-rājā (righteous king), he is supreme
among competitors.
44 Vinaya Piṭaka, Mahāvagga, 6.28.6, 8.24.6.
45 Arthaśāstra, 11.1.160–1.
46 Mahāsudassana-sutta, Dīgha-nikāya, 2.172.
404 The Past Before Us
The king is not divine but is expected to be the epitome of
righteousness, accountable to the people who elect him initially,
and therefore the absence of a king (arājya) is a state of chaos.47
The exemplar of kingship is the cakkavatti/cakravartin.48 The idea
evolved slowly and was given a distinctively Buddhist connotation
different from the ideal brahmanical kṣatriya. The cakkavatti, the
lord of the four quarters, rules in accordance with dhamma—the
just law—and in righteousness rather than by might. Righteous
rule involves justly assessed taxation, appropriate social actions at
appropriate moments, and the well-being of society. Such a ruler
is the protector of his people and of the seven precious objects
associated with sovereignty. He is imbued with iddhi, a magical
superhuman power which makes him handsome, long-lived,
healthy, and popular, and is marked by the thirty-two auspicious
signs of the great man.49 This allows him the choice of either
becoming a great monarch and a cakkavatti or else a monk, and
eventually a Buddha. The counterposing of kingship with renun-
ciation is axiomatic.
Brahmanical texts define the cakravartin as one aware of
dharma, but emphasize the idea of digvijaya—literally the con-
quest of the four quarters—marking the quality of a ruler. For
the Buddhist cakkavatti the wheel of law was primary. The moral
authority of dharma in the brahmanical model required affirma-
tion by the gods via the priests through the medium of ritual. For
the Buddhist, moral authority overrides the ritual. The cakkavatti,
therefore, because he propagates the dhamma, is less the coercive
king and more the compassionate and concerned paternal figure.
Hence Aśoka’s emphasis on savve munissā me pajā—all men are
my children.50 Daṇḍa is subordinate to dharma. The king is not
an opponent of the Saṅgha, nor is the Saṅgha an independent
authority. What is sometimes referred to as the two wheels—the
47 Aggañña-sutta, Dīgha-nikāya, 3.92.20–93.
48 Mahasudassana-sutta, Dīgha-nikāya, 2.169ff., 2.198ff.; Cakkavatti-
sīhanāḍa-sutta, 3.59ff., ibid.; Lakkhaṇa-sutta, 3.142ff., ibid., etc.
49 Majjhima Nikāya, 2.134; V. Trenckner and R. Chalmers (eds), The Majjhima
Nikāya, 3 vols; I.B. Horner (trans.), The Collection of the Middle Length Sayings,
3 vols; Dīgha-nikāya, 2.177.
50 J. Bloch, Les Inscriptions d’Asoka, 137.
The Buddhist Tradition: Monks as Historians 405
dharmacakra or the wheel of righteousness, and the ājñacakra or
the wheel of authority—seemingly suggests a dichotomy between
the Saṅgha and the king. In effect, the dichotomy is muted.
The symbol of the cakkavatti was the wheel, which was visible
outside the hall of audience, where it had come to rest after having
rolled through many territories in every direction. The wheel was
not inherited but had to be earned through ruling in accordance
with the dhamma, and eliminating evil activities and poverty,
otherwise the wheel would disappear. If the king ruled justly the
wheel would rest near the hall of justice. If the king was unjust,
the wheel would sink into the earth and the king would lose it.51
It was then predicted that centuries later there would be an evil
king who would not follow the norms of the dhamma, and people
would be given to stealing, lying, violence, and lack of piety, with
a drastic reduction in lifespans. Many would be murdered and the
rest would flee to the forest. This echoes the dystopia prior to the
mahāsammata and the myth of the declining cycles of time ending
in the Kaliyuga. Eventually, there would be a rejuvenation, a return
to the beginning, and a new cakkavatti, a wheel-turning king would
bring order back. This is also tied to the statement on the decline
of the doctrine and its revival through the coming of the Buddha
Maitreya, a parallel to the saviour figure in other religions.52
The notion of the cakkavatti represents the kingdom and the
state as paramount. But the Buddhist and brahmanical perspect-
ives on the state differ. Varṇāśramadharma from the brahmanical
perspective has to be instilled and protected by the state and so-
ciety, despite it introducing a divisive ethic conditioned by varṇa.
The Buddhist association of dhamma with the cakkavatti trans-
formed the state from being solely an agency of authority to being
an ethical category.53 As a universal category the state allows the
possibility of universal ethics. The king’s good actions, such as
largesse to the Saṅgha, bring him merit. Personal merit was not
associated with elements of the divine.54 The king’s legitimacy
51 Mahāsudassana-sutta, Dīgha-nikāya, 2.172-4; Majjhima Nikāya, 3.172–3.
52 Cakkavatti-sīhanāḍa-sutta, Dīgha-nikāya, 3.74.
53 T. Ling, The Buddha, 140–7.
54 R. Heine-Geldern, “Conceptions of State and Kingship in South East
Asia”, 15–30.
406 The Past Before Us
was reiterated through closeness to the Saṅgha. Righteousness
as a prerequisite of the king is endorsed in a late section of the
Mahābhārata, when Yudhiṣṭhira is being persuaded to accept
kingship.55 This could be a concession to Buddhist thinking, be-
ing different from the Arthaśāstra upholding power. Buddhist
theory disapproved of the khattavijja/kṣatriya vidyā.56 The ideal
was the rājā-cakkavatti dhammiko-dhammarājā. As a universal
ethic it assumed the equality of all and this contradicted the
varṇāśramadharma.
The establishing of the state as well as the authority of the Saṅgha
was part of the historical narrative. Governance involved the
interface between the two much more visibly than in other tradi-
tions. The state embodying sasana/śāsana was parallel to the
Saṅgha upholding Buddha-śāsana. The state had to be a system
that produced more than just the essential so that it could main-
tain the community, which in turn maintained the Saṅgha, and the
king could be its patron. It was gradually conceded that a royal
patron could assist in making laws for the śāsana. Patronage
from individuals in the form of dāna (gift-giving) enhanced the
patron’s acquisition of merit. Dāna was a replacement of yajña
and sacrificial rituals, and was the tie between the householder
and the monk, where contrasting ways of living did not obstruct
interdependence. The recording of donations was important to the
history of the Saṅgha, apart from dāna furthering merit.
8. The Concept of Time
In Buddhist thinking there is both a separation and an intersection
of cyclic and linear time, depending on its function. Yet this is not
identical with the concept of time in Puranic thinking. Measure-
ment in historical terms, i.e. the centrality of the mahāparinirvāṇa
as the focal point to calculate chronology as well as the recording
of genealogies and the succession of the Elders, conforms to linear
time. Cosmological time viewed as a cycle tends to be similar to
notions of the Puranic tradition. Cosmological time, generational
55 Mahābhārata, Śānti parvan, 90.3–5; 13–15; 91.3ff.
56 Brahmajāla-sutta, Dīgha-nikāya, I.9.18.n3; 80.1ff.
The Buddhist Tradition: Monks as Historians 407
time, and linear time all exist but function in contexts different
from the Puranic.
Cosmological time is cyclic and linked to the notion of kalpas/
kappas (aeons). A kappa is a cycle of existence and plays on im-
mense measures of time, such as mahākappas, asamkheyya
kappas, and antara kappas (countless eons). This is the time that
is recalled in the history of the Buddhas who preceded Gautama
and the numbers are symbolic. Thus, Dipaṅkara lived for 84,000
lakhs of years in a period of 100,000s of unaccountable kappas
ago. The figure of 84 is treated as magical in many cultures of the
subcontinent. The last few kappas decline in length.
The asamkheyya kappas were divided into four—gold, silver,
copper, and iron, with a gradual decline in the downward move-
ment of the cycle and a gradual progress in the upward movement.
The time scale involved is so vast that it cannot be comprehended
in human terms. Only the last part of the kappa can constitute what
might be called historical time. Cosmological time is the begin-
ning of an evolution up to where we are now. The inevitability of
the decline is also underlined in the decrease of the human life
span from 80,000 years to 10. These ideas resonate with similar
patterns in other traditions.57
The timelessness of time has sometimes to be described spa-
tially as its span is incalculable. In one passage there are three
sets of questions: how far back is the beginning of time; how long
is a kappa; how many have already passed away? In answer to
the first, it is said that if a man prunes all the grass, twigs, and
boughs from the whole of Jambudvīpa and stacks them in piles
to mark the generations counting back from his mother’s mother,
the material will not suffice. Similarly, if a man were to make clay
balls out of the whole of this earth, they will not suffice to count
the generations from his father’s father back in time.
As for the number of kalpas that have passed, it is said that if
the grains of sand which lie along the river Ganges from its source
to the sea were to be counted, it would give the number of past
kalpas. If there is a cube-shaped hill measuring one yojana each
57 The Greek cyclic concept of time also refers to four ages or cycles differen-
tiated as gold, silver, copper, and iron, with an inherent assumption of decline.
408 The Past Before Us
way and if the top were to be brushed with a scarf every hundred
years, then the time it would take for the hill to disappear would
still be less than a kalpa. If a city, cubic in form and with iron
walls, was to be filled with mustard seeds, and if one seed were
taken out every hundred years, the final seed would be taken out
in a period which is still short of a kalpa. Clearly, this is not time
that allows any calculation. It is a metaphor for time too distant to
be real. It is deep time or timeless time and can only be explained
spatially.
At the philosophical level, the Buddhist theory of time differed
from brahmanical views. Arguing that reality was a flux and time
was of the instant, it was held that real time was that of the kṣaṇa/
moment or instant. Time therefore is perishable and the duration
of time is a fiction.58 There was opposition to the Upaniṣadic view
of the ātmavāda, the permanence of the ātman, and the notion of
the unchanging eternal soul.59
The new cycle in Buddhist cosmology continued from the old
with the completion of its upswing. If it bypasses the point of its
beginning even marginally, it mutates into a spiral, and a spiral
if extended takes the form of a wave. Such a form, although not
strictly linear, has some of the characteristics of linear time. One of
these is the notion of the utopia to come, the golden age that lies in
the future. This is different from the utopia that initiated the cycle.
The utopia to come is expressed in the concept of the Buddha
Maitreya, the future Buddha who will re-establish the doctrine.
Only then can the moral regression of the world from utopian
beginnings be set right. To that extent this is the eschatology of
the Buddhist view of time, presented in a chiliastic form.
Generational time as a form of linear time is invoked in the genea-
logies succeeding Mahāsammata, but this list is generally vague
and lacks even the imagined precision of Puranic lists. The genea-
logical sections subsequent to the mahāsammata follow the same
form as those of the Sūryavaṃśa in the Purāṇas. The genealogy
sets out the ancestry of the Śākyas and provides a sequence. The
succession lists of the Elders are constructed more carefully since
58 N.A. Balslev, A Study of Time in Indian Philosophy, 80ff.
59 T.V.R. Murti, The Central Philosophy of Buddhism, 74–5, 121.
The Buddhist Tradition: Monks as Historians 409
they bear on succession to high office, are often correlated with
ruling kings, and refer to rules of discipline and to dissidence.
These also commanded rights to property when monasteries be-
came landlords, all of which is better managed through records
conforming to linear time.
In linear time no ambiguity is allowed in what pertains to his-
tory. There is a single, central date, the mahāparinirvāṇa, from
which later events are calculated. This both reinforced and was
reinforced by the appeal to history. The basis of the calculation
remains unchanged, though the date could be shifted a little. In
theory it was the chronological bedrock. What is important about
this emphasis on the linear is that it is finite time. A single event
occurs once in a limited timespan and has no cyclical recurrence.
There was however no sharp dichotomy between different con-
cepts of time.
9. Traces of Historical Thinking
The texts that suggest a Buddhist historiography are different in
structure and content, and in the formulation of a historical tradi-
tion, from those discussed in the previous chapters. They are up to
a point ecclesiastical, but, in relating this to a political presence, the
secular becomes a part of their history. Their concern is with the
history of the Buddha as a historical figure and with the Buddhist
Saṅgha and its multiple sects with their particular historical as-
sociations. Neither of these can be isolated from the wider society,
since both are recognized as rooted in a historical context.60 This
relationship is expressed in a continual interaction of intention and
event where factual material is brought in to strengthen dogma.
The resistance to persecution and being treated as heresy becomes
important and may have furthered the link to political authority
and the need for history. The political role of the sect was upheld
not just by its closeness to royalty but also by its involvement in
the community of lay followers. The Saṅgha’s dependence on a
lay following, articulate in votive inscriptions at stūpa sites in
60 Cf. A. Momigliano, “The Origins of Ecclesiastical Historiography”,
132ff.
410 The Past Before Us
particular, is a comment on the nature of the dependence61 In later
times, this was furthered through the participation of monasteries
in commerce and activity related to grants of land.
Interaction with political order was more effective if backed by
the vihāra (monastery) in its sīmā (boundary), in effect the terri-
tory that held the community with which it interacted. The Saṅgha
often had fiscal and juridical rights over large properties that
involved local communities, giving it a socio-economic identity
pivotal to the community.62 This is apparent by the mid-first mil-
lennium ad although its beginnings were earlier.63 If kings and
ministers were given to political intrigue, so were the monastic
Elders. It was sometimes difficult to distinguish between heresy
and political rebellion. The cry of heresy was often a means of uni-
fying those that formed the original core, or those that had been
excluded. Persecution often had its origins in competition, and the
successful used it to enhance their power and attempt to include
a larger number of the community.
That the history of the Saṅgha was also a wider history can
be recognized in these texts. Dynastic succession is sometimes
paralleled by the succession of the Elders, with cross-references
to rulers. History comes to include biography, since the lives of
both kings and Theras affect the Saṅgha. Texts were important
to the institution, so they were read by monks and recited to
the upāsakas (lay followers). Attracting an audience may have
required including fragments of the oral tradition, such as ori-
gin myths and the existence of pre-Buddhist societies, although
doubtless most monks would also have enjoyed these narratives.
Rhetoric, literary style, and hyperbole were not seen as devia-
tions from measured factual evidence but as marks of emphasis,
demarcating the significant from the ordinary. For example, nar-
ratives about the emperor Aśoka included the miraculous where
it could highlight a point.
61 G. Schopen, Bones, Stones and Buddhist Monks, 72ff.; R.A.L.H. Gunawar-
dana, Robe and Plough: Monasticism and Economic Interest in Early Medieval
Sri Lanka.
62 R. Thapar, “Patronage and the Community”, in Cultural Pasts, 589–609.
63 R.A.L.H. Gunawardana, Robe and Plough: Monasticism and Economic
Interest in Early Medieval Sri Lanka.
The Buddhist Tradition: Monks as Historians 411
The history of the Saṅgha was local in pertaining to its com-
munity and patron, but also had a vision of itself as universal
in its reference. The closeness of the Saṅgha to what had been
the community shows in its prototype—the gaṇa-saṅgha—and to
which there is occasionally an imperceptible harking back.
Although the Buddhist texts give space to genealogies, they are
nevertheless not as obsessive about them as were the vaṃśānucarita
sections of the Viṣṇu Purāṇa. Genealogies were more pertinent to
the description of earlier societies; for later periods they took the
form of the succession of Elders. Such diminishing importance of
kin connections reflects a society more familiar with established
kingship and statehood rather than with clan chiefs and the kings of
emerging kingdoms. The Buddha, in recommending the function-
ing of the clan societies as the ideal for the Saṅgha, had perhaps
not anticipated how quickly Buddhist teaching would be located
in kingdoms and their respect for the Saṅgha. This in itself would
have made the Saṅgha a distinctive institution in the context of
polities conforming to kingship.
In institutions where monetary wealth and property are gifted
rather than acquired through inheritance, the emphasis on genea-
logies declines or has other meanings—since the origin of wealth
did not have to be proved by genealogical links. The patronage
of urban families, particularly of the seṭṭhis (financiers and trad-
ers), tended to release the hold of inherited property in land, and
the rise of rich merchants disrupted the older lineage demands.
Newly evolving urban cultures tend to be less circumscribed by
antecedents. At the same time, lists of succession were important
in identifying relations with political authority, for chronology, and
for stabilizing the monastery in terms of claiming a past.
Something of the contractual element of the urban environment
seeped through and there was less emphasis on status alone. There
was a freer attitude to caste, frequently expressed in terms of jāti
rather than varṇa. Sramanic religions such as Buddhism and Jain-
ism emphasize the importance of the individual, particularly in
attaining nirvāṇa or freedom from rebirth. There is, in this, much
less dependence on the limitations imposed by the functions of
caste.
The Buddhists were not invariably part of the heterodoxy. In
412 The Past Before Us
some areas they were the prevalent religious group. It is said that
in the Indian context the opposition of orthodoxy and heterodoxy
is less relevant and the more appropriate term would be orthopraxy,
since it is in the nature of rituals and social observances that these
differences were central. This did not preclude arguments on some
fundamental issues of belief. The Canon includes some antitheses
to brahmanical doctrine that make it oppositional to the Vedas.64
Among those mentioned more frequently were the impermanence
of time, the negation of the ātman as soul, the absence of deities,
and the centrality of causality to understanding the world.
It has been suggested that Buddhism was not given to treating
history as important since the Buddha disapproved of popular
chatter about historical subjects pertaining to kings, ministers,
wars, and suchlike, and furthermore the impermanence of time—
which was basic to Buddhist thinking—is not exactly conducive
to creating a historical tradition.65 Yet the Pāli Canon has some-
thing of an underlying historical logic. It goes back to the origins
of being a Buddha in a mix of mythology, and a degree of logical
reconstruction, moving to the history of the Buddha’s activities.
After this comes the establishing of the Saṅgha and its history
through the Councils and the schisms. Narrated in a chronological
order with some degree of causality in explaining events, there is
recognition of the flow, and a concern with some rational explana-
tions, even if interspersed with mythology.
The Buddha’s fundamental teaching of pratītya-samutpāda (de-
pendent origination) underlined hetu (cause) as essential to under-
standing the past. Events do not happen in isolation, there is an
order to their sequence.66 The pattern has to be recognized, given
that the universe is impermanent and changing, a theory that
doubtless encouraged the idea of historical change.
The creation of what might be called a Buddhist historical
tradition is present in its views of the past as given in the vaṃsa
(succession). Enlightenment was not a divine moment but an
64 R. Gombrich, “Recovering the Buddha’s Message”; K.R. Norman, Pali
Literature, 8.
65 B.G. Gokhale, “On Buddhist Historiography”, 99–108.
66 G.C. Pande, Studies in the Origins of Buddhism, 423–4.
The Buddhist Tradition: Monks as Historians 413
enquiry basing itself on analytical reasoning and the importance
of causation.67 There are diverse views on the teaching of the
Buddha but in its evolution the constituents of a historical tradi-
tion are evident.
The history recorded in Buddhist texts is initially the history of
a person, but with the death of the person evolves into the history
of an institution—the Saṅgha. Kings play a role in supporting
it or undermining it, as is amply demonstrated in the narratives
of texts such as those that refer to Aśoka, and others later that
mention Puṣyamitra Śuṅga. But the Saṅgha remains the histori-
cal protagonist—as will become clear from the Chronicles of the
Māhāvihāra monastery.
67 T. Ling, The Buddha, 130ff.; Majjhima Nikāya, I, 160ff.
10
The Monastic Chronicles of
Sri Lanka
1. The Chronicles
Putting together the story of the Saṅgha, and the claim that
its Canon was the authentic teaching of the Buddha, was a
necessary exercise for any Buddhist mission. When doing
so, the advantages of having a presumed history of the Saṅgha
became evident. In order to validate the narrative, evidence had
to be quoted, particularly in an ambience where there were rival
histories, and the more so if that version was linked to authority—
as was the claim of the Theravāda.
Narratives underlined the authority of the Saṅgha within the
Buddhist community, but for status in society as a whole a surer
way was association with political authority—the king and the
court. This was done in the Canon by linking ruling kings with
the Buddhist Councils. It was furthered by drawing on a range of
lay followers as patrons, all personable householders who owned
land or were prominent merchants—the gahapatis and seṭṭhis. This
association gave the Saṅgha status, but again validating it meant
recording events pertaining to its connection with secular author-
ity. Since the connection was through monastic establishments,
writing the chronicle of the leading monastery, recording events
important to its links with other authorities, and its competition
with other monasteries, became a way of establishing recog-
nition.
The Monastic Chronicles of Sri Lanka 415
Representative examples of this are the Pāli Chronicles from
Sri Lanka. The earlier ones include substantial references to the
history of northern India to make the connection to the Buddha and
the Saṅgha, and are a contrast to the record of the same history in
the Puranic tradition. Monasteries, emphasizing literacy, encour-
aged the keeping and preserving of records. This was far less
pronounced in the Puranic tradition of pre-Gupta times. It is also
somewhat puzzling that similar chronicles were not maintained
in Indian monasteries, particularly where Buddhism had effective
patrons, especially in the period between the third century bc and
the third ad. Possibly the Saṅgha was not that close to political
authority, despite the patronage of rulers such as Aśoka, since
its major donors were not limited to royalty. More importantly,
political authority distributed its patronage to other sects as well:
bonding with a single sect was not the pattern.
When the Chronicles were first studied in the early nineteenth
century, there was a debate on whether or not they could be taken
as history.1 It was initially maintained by G. Turnour that these
chronicles were a reliable historical narrative of events pertaining
to Sri Lanka, their reliability meeting the test of modern histori-
cal writing.2 This approach was debated but endorsed by scholars
such as H. Oldenberg and more so by W. Geiger and G.P. Malalase-
kera. Recently, it has been argued that the context and purpose
for which they were written should be discussed by scholars
prior to accepting their statements.3 One can, however, draw out
the reflections of the Chronicles on the past in the context of
constituting a distinctive historical tradition, with interests dif-
ferent from those in other parallel and contemporary historical
traditions of the region.
The early history of the Saṅgha in Sri Lanka, and of the king-
dom of Anurādhapura as available in the monastic Chronicles,
1 J.S. Walters, “Buddhist History”, 99–164.
2 G. Turnour, An Epitome of the History of Ceylon Compiled from Native An­
nals; and the First Twenty Chapters of the Mahawanso.
3 H. Bechert, William Geiger: His Life and Works; G. Obeyesekere, “Myth,
History and Numerology in the Buddhist Chronicles”, 152–82; P. Jeganathan,
“Authorizing History: Ordering Land: The Conquest of Anuradhapura”, 106–38;
J.S. Walters, “Buddhist History”, 99–164.
416 The Past Before Us
draws on the Canon in Pāli as well as non-Canonical sources.4
The Chronicles are the Dīpavaṃsa,5 the Mahāvaṃsa,6 and the
later Cūlavaṃsa.7 The first two Chronicles narrate the history
of the Mahāvihāra, the monastery central to Theravāda in Sri
Lanka, located at Anurādhapura, and the early history of the
king dom. Events in India are treated as background, leading to
events in Sri Lanka wherever there were connections. All three
Chronicles present the history of the middle Ganges plain from
a Theravāda perspective. Later commentaries on the Pāli Canon
and on these Chronicles, such as the Samantapāsādikā and the
Vaṃsatthappakāsini, provide further details.8 These chronicles
and commentaries reflect the history of the Saṅgha, its relations
with the state, variants of the narrative, and glosses on the mean-
ing of passages where these are thought necessary.9 Collectively,
they reveal the fact that established religions sprout sectarian
confrontations, and sects need to write commentaries to explain
their contestations. Such explanations are also needed to convince
new converts.
The vaṃsa virtually became a generic form as a record of ob-
jects, events, persons, and activities. This was handy material, even
if not always reliable for writing chronicles. The Buddhavaṃsa
goes back to the Pāli Canon but as a vaṃsa it takes forward the
idea of succession. It draw the Buddha into the narrative of the past
almost as a proxy for deity. The Buddhavaṃsa becomes a source
for other kinds of succession. Contemporary with the contents of
4 G.C. Mendis, The Pali Chronicles of Ceylon; see also C.E. Godakumbara,
“Historical Writing in Sinhalese”, in C.H. Philips (ed.), Historians of India,
Pakistan and Ceylon, 72–86; A.K. Warder, “The Pali Canon and its Commen-
taries as Historical Records”, ibid., 44–56; S. Seneviratne, “Peripheral Regions
and Marginal Communities . . .”, in R. Champakalakshmi and S. Gopal (eds),
Tradition, Dissent, and Ideology, 266–70.
5 The Dīpavaṃsa, ed. and trans. H. Oldenberg.
6 The Mahāvaṃsa, ed. and trans. W. Geiger.
7 Cūlavaṃsa, ed. and trans. W. Geiger.
8 Samantapāsādikā: Buddhaghosa’s Commentary on the Vinaya Piṭaka, ed.
J. Takakusu and M. Nagai; Vaṃsatthappakāsini (Mahāvaṃsa Ṭīkā), ed. G.P.
Malalasekera; G.C. Mendis, The Pali Chronicles of Ceylon, 23.
9 R.A.L.H. Gunawardana, “The Kinsmen of the Buddha: Myth and Political
Charter in the Ancient and Medieval Kingdoms in Sri Lanka”, 62; B.L. Smith
(ed.), Religion and the Legitimation of Power in Sri Lanka.
The Monastic Chronicles of Sri Lanka 417
the commentaries and chronicles are inscriptions, which constitute
both comparative and corroborative data.10 Inscriptions provide
evidence of the social and economic support given to the Saṅgha
by lay society. They also provide evidence on the organization
and functioning of monasteries, the succession of Theras and the
links with kings.
The Dīpavaṃsa, though composed over a period of time, was
compiled by anonymous authors in about the fourth-fifth century
ad.11 It has been suggested that its authors may have been nuns.
Given the early date at which women were ordained as nuns in
Sri Lanka—attested to by inscriptions—their writing of portions
of texts would not be surprising, and this chronicle gives much
attention to the activities of nuns.12 As the name implies, it purports
to be a history of the island. The Pāli is of uneven quality, sug-
gesting an authorship not completely at home with the language.13
Possibly, the original was composed in Sihala and then translated
into Pāli. Vaṃsa is used in a general sense of a chronicle narrat-
ing a succession of persons and events. It provides a prototype
for the Mahāvaṃsa.
The Mahāvaṃsa, dating to the next century, is more detailed,
with a better crafted text and finer literary style. The focus remains
on the Mahāvihāra monastery and the Theravāda sect, but is in-
tertwined with the history of the island. Authorship is attributed
to a monk, Mahānāma of the Mahāvihāra monastery. Among
its sources the Sihala-aṭṭhakathā-mahāvaṃsa is mentioned, but
which has not survived. The aṭṭhakathās were commentaries on
Buddhist matters in Sri Lanka, composed in various monasteries.
They tended to be didactic and were meant for the edification of
monks.14 The Porāṇas and Porāṇāṭṭhakathās were also regarded
as ancient and authoritative. There are some similarities in names
and regnal years with the dynastic section of the vaṃśānucarita
10 A pioneering work on these inscriptions is L.S. Perera, The Institutions of
Ancient Ceylon from Inscriptions: Vol. I, Third Century bc to 830 ad. The work
was put together half a century before it was published.
11 Dīpavaṃsa, 8–9.
12 Dīpavaṃsa, 18.1ff.; R.A.L.H. Gunawardana, “Subtile Silks of Ferrous
Firmness”, 1–59; G.P. Malalasekera, The Pāli Literature of Ceylon, 36–7.
13 M. Winternitz, A History of Indian Literature, vol. II, 210ff.
14 E.W. Adikaram, Early History of Buddhism in Ceylon.
418 The Past Before Us
in the Purāṇas.15 The record of the monastery was apparently
main tained until its desertion. These were not the only histori-
cal works, although they are earlier and more representative and
establish a genre.16
The chronicle is distinguished from the popular narrative and
epic poetry by its specific purpose, namely that the Buddha chose
Sri Lanka to be a centre of Buddhism and that Theravāda as re-
presented in the Mahāvihāra monastery contributed the essential
teaching. Events moved to make this possible.17
2. The Dīpavaṃsa
The first event in the Chronicle had to be the coming of the Buddha
to Sri Lanka in order to prepare the island, predestined to receive
the doctrine. It is said that he flew thrice to the island to select loca-
tions for future monasteries and stūpas, thereby giving a special
sanctity to such places. Prior to the establishing of a kingdom on
the island, it was inhabited by yakkhas, bhūtas, rākṣasas, nāgas, and
suchlike—supernatural creatures who dwelt in the forests and had
to be subordinated to become worshippers of the Buddha.18 The
coming of the Buddha made it relevant to introduce the history
of northern India. The genealogy of the Buddha is taken back to
Mahāsammata, and mention is made of lineages similar to those
of the Purāṇas, but occurring in different combinations. The
Cedis and Okkākas/Ikṣvākus are part of the same lineage, which
contradicts the Purāṇas, where the two are distinct.19 The Purāṇas
are used as a partial source but the narratives differ.
The story of Vijaya and his entourage coming as migrants from
India and establishing a succession of rulers follows as a form
of epic beginnings.20 The name of the island, Siṅhala/Sihala, is
15 Mahāvaṃsa, xli.
16 L.S. Perera, “The Pali Chronicles of Ceylon”, 29ff.
17 S. Kiribamune, “The Dīpavaṃsa in Ancient Sri Lankan Historiography”,
89–100.
18 R.A.L.H. Gunawardana, “The Kingdom of the Buddha: Myth as Political
Charter in the Ancient and Early Medieval Kingdom of Sri Lanka”, 54ff.
19 Dīpavaṃsa, 3.5; 3.41; F.E. Pargiter, Ancient Indian Historical Tradition,
144–9.
20 Dīpavaṃsa, 9.20ff.
The Monastic Chronicles of Sri Lanka 419
explained through Vijaya’s ancestry being linked to a lion. In other
sources the island is called Taṃbapaṇi/Taprobane—a name also
used for southern India, with Sihala becoming common at the start
of the Christian era. Subsequently, the name changed to Laṅkā.
Vijaya’s formal marriage was to a South Indian princess. This
would support the idea of the initial settlements and culture being
associated with the mainland.21 Vijaya has no heir, so a successor
from a co-lateral line is sent for from India. The names of these
rulers seem to be taken from the Jātakas and the Mahābhārata.22
This segment is a prologue to the subsequent narrative about
early history.
The scene then shifts to the middle Ganges plain. The ancestry
of the Buddha is traced from Okkāka down to Daśaratha and Rāma
to Śuddhodhana, followed by some of the kings of Magadha.23 The
chronology is Puranic, although precise sources are not men-
tioned.24 The association with kings introduces further links
between the Saṅgha and political authority.
Soon after the Buddha’s death, the First Council is said to have
been called at Rājagṛha to record his teaching. A century later, a
Second Council meets at Vaiśāli, as also mentioned in the Canon.25
Disagreement at this later Council splits the Saṅgha. Another
correlation is made between the succession of Theras and kings
of the Ganges plain in an attempt to establish a chronology. The
conversion of Aśoka and associated miracles are described.26
Given the presence of dissenters in the Saṅgha, Aśoka is made
the patron of the Third Council at Pāṭaliputra.27 The dissenters are
expelled and the Theravāda is established as the true doctrine.
Buddhist missions are sent to various places and Aśoka’s son,
Mahinda, brings Buddhism to Sri Lanka. This explains why the
21 S. Kiribamune, “Buddhist Historiography: Sri Lankan Perception”,
9–15.
22 G.C. Mendis, The Pali Chronicles of Ceylon, 59ff.
23 Dīgha-nikāya, 3.39, 3.52.
24 S. Kiribamune, “The Dīpavaṃsa in Ancient Sri Lankan History”,
89–100.
25 Dīpavaṃsa, 4.1–25, 4.1.47, 5.16.
26 Dīpavaṃsa, 5.76, 6.1ff.
27 Dīpavaṃsa, 7.39ff.
420 The Past Before Us
earlier narratives were necessary as antecedents. Mention of the
Third Council is omitted in the Canon, which is surprising as it
would have further legitimized the Theravāda.
The one king of consequence in Sri Lanka at this point is Devā-
naṃpiya Tissa, a contemporary of Aśoka, who took the same title,
devānaṃpiya. The two narratives of India and Sri Lanka are tied
together with the coming of Mahinda, and his successful conver-
sion of the king and court,28 an event also recorded in inscriptions.
This is followed by the arrival of Mahinda’s sister to ordain the
women, together with a number of relics, including a branch of
the sacred Bodhi tree. Apart from the relics, the objects signifying
kingship, such as the royal umbrella, turban, and sword, are all
said to have come from Aśoka. The conversion is widespread—
as also attested to, incidentally, by the votive inscriptions of the
local gentry, the pārumakas. Up to this point the Chronicle is
concerned with the establishing of Buddhism and the rise of the
Theravāda. Much space is devoted to how Aśoka as a Buddhist
ruler and exemplar of a cakkavatti upheld the dhamma and was
a remarkable patron of the Saṅgha. Events are a mixture of hard
politics and the mira culous.
On the death of Aśoka, the interest in northern India flags and
the narrative focuses on the history of Sri Lanka. However, rela-
tions with South India are referred to. These would have been
more relevant, the kingdoms of the South being neighbours, as
becomes evident in the political disturbance of the subsequent
period. The Damila/Tamil chief Elāra ousts the Sihala ruler. The
hero Duṭṭhagāmaṇi defeats Elāra and the Chronicle becomes
something of a heroic epic in praise of Duṭṭhagāmaṇi. He uni-
fies the island, defends it against the Damilas, whose threats did
not completely cease, and re-establishes the Theravāda. Having
overcome its first crisis, a eulogy on the Mahāvihāra monastery
is thought to be appropriate. This is followed by references to
various monasteries and stūpas built by various rulers, as also
irrigation works that aimed at the production of larger revenues to
the monasteries, apart from the general expansion of agriculture.
Soon after, in the reign of Vaṭṭagāmaṇi, close to the Christian era,
28 Dīpavaṃsa, 12.16.
The Monastic Chronicles of Sri Lanka 421
the text of the three Piṭakas and the Aṭṭhakathā were compiled
and put into written form, doubtless to secure the teaching and to
enable its being quoted. This may also have encouraged the idea
of writing a history of the island.29
The Dīpavaṃsa is thought to conclude on a note that is aware
of the conflict between the Theravāda and other Buddhist sects,
competing for royal patronage and asserting their authority.30
3. The Mahāvaṃsa
The Mahāvaṃsa emerges as the narrative of the success of the
Theravāda sect, after another crisis in its history. It is much more
self-consciously historical than the Dīpavaṃsa. The first thirty-
seven chapters, written by the monk Mahānāma, are generally
dated to the fifth–sixth century ad.31 The narrative ends in the
fourth century ad with the reign of Mahāsena, who initially un-
dermined the Mahāvihāra monastery. The history of the monastery
is projected as so central that it becomes in effect the history of
a kingdom. Mahānāma was directly linked to the royal family,
being kinsman of the contemporary ruler, Dhātusena. The text
is written in a different mood from the Dīpavaṃsa. It is a fine-
tuning, as it were, of the history of the Mahāvihāra. Inevitably,
the events selected and emphasized are not identical with those
in the earlier Chronicle. The voice of the Mahāvaṃsa is more
aggressively purposeful. The sequence in the Cūlavaṃsa was writ-
ten still later. The Mahāvaṃsa starts with the statement that the
earlier texts were either too brief or too long and repetitive, and
have therefore been rewritten by Mahānāma.32 Updating texts was
part of the paramparā (tradition). The Mahāvaṃsa also states that
the Canon was initially orally memorized and the written version
came much later.33
29 Dīpavaṃsa, 20.20–1.
30 S. Kiribamune, “The Dīpavaṃsa in Ancient Sri Lankan Historiography”,
89–100.
31 S. Kiribamune, “The Mahāvaṃsa: A Study of the Ancient Historiography
of Sri Lanka”, 125–36.
32 Mahāvaṃsa, 1.2ff.
33 Mahāvaṃsa, 33.100–1.
422 The Past Before Us
The core events of the Mahāvaṃsa remain much the same
as in the Dīpavaṃsa, but the emphases change. The genealogy
of the Buddha and the synchronization with the early kings of
Magadha is given in greater detail.34 There is a preference for the
Mahāsammata rather than Okkāka as the founding ancestor, possi-
bly because Okkāka founded a lineage whereas the Mahāsammata
inaugurated governance—which brought kingship and the state.
The centrality of kingship had to be highlighted. Kṣatriya ancestry
bestowed status, especially with the Buddha having declared the
khattiyas as socially superior to all others. The notion of royalty
was absent in the Buddha’s explanation of mahāsammata, but by
now what was initially a concept had become a royal person.
Mauryan history was a necessary frame for the coming of Buddh-
ism to Sri Lanka. Coincidentally, it is the history of the metropoli-
tan area—of the middle Ganges plain35—which is linked to the
history of Sri Lanka. This was not only the area where Buddhism
flourished but also had had the greatest political significance in the
early history of northern India. There is little interest in Mathura,
Gandhara, and Kashmir, the areas linked to the Northern Buddhist
tradition. The link peters out after Aśoka is said to have virtually
legitimized the Theravāda. The narrative then focuses on relations
with South Indian neighbours who inevitably intervened in the
politics of Sri Lanka, being physically present so close by.
Vijaya’s retinue accompanies him from Magadha to Sri Lanka,
involving some readjusting of the Buddhist origin myths—to the
start of the history of Sri Lanka.36 In some ways the Vijaya story
is the prototype story of immigrants settling in a new land. The
existing inhabitants are brought low, denounced as demonic, and
sent to live in the forest, where they remain obscure. Marriages
with their women are not formalized, although there is progeny
and the migrants await women from their homeland. The children
thus born were the progenitors of the forest-dwelling Pulindas.
Was Vijaya more likely to have been from across the straits and
not from northern India because his formal marriage was to the
34 Mahāvaṃsa, 2.1–33, 4.1–8, 5.14–23.
35 R. Thapar, The Mauryas Revisited, in Cultural Pasts, 462–518.
36 Mahāvaṃsa, 6.47.
The Monastic Chronicles of Sri Lanka 423
Paṇḍu princess from Madurai (a Pāṇḍya from Madurai?) in South
India?37 His North Indian origins were intended to link him to the
land of the Buddha.38 His arrival becomes auspicious as it is said
to have coincided with the Buddha’s parinirvāṇa.
Since Vijaya has no son, his brother’s son, Pāṇḍuvāsudeva, is
sent for. The name is archetypal and suggests a familiarity with
the Ghaṭa Jātaka, the Mahābhārata, and the Harivaṃśa. The
link is further endorsed by the curious story of his successor
Paṇḍukābhaya, which echoes the legend of the birth of Kṛṣṇa Vāsu-
deva. The child is hidden at birth, reared by relatives, and comes
into conflict with his maternal uncle, whom he finally kills. It may
be argued that though this story carries the stereotype of the myth
of the birth of the hero,39 the details are too similar for it to have
been a coincidence. It could have been an attempt to link the royal
family of Sri Lanka with the Vṛṣṇi-Yādava clan of western India,
reiterating what is said in passing in the Chronicle—that Vijaya
sailed from western India. A possible Cedi connection also lurks
in the background, becoming more visible some centuries later.
At the same time, connection with the clan of the Buddha is main-
tained through the curious coincidence of Paṇḍuvāsudeva having
married a Śākya lady!40 Thus, the ancestry of the royal house of
Sri Lanka is traced to socially high antecedents. The consecra-
tion of Paṇḍukābhaya is described and his descendants listed up
to the time of Devānaṃpiya Tissa. If at all there is a resort to the
formulaic, it occurs in the earlier portions of this narrative.41 Since
37 Mahāvaṃsa, 7.50.
38 That there was close contact between south-west India and northern
Sri Lanka is evident from the striking similarities in the Megalithic Black and
Red Ware cultures in both areas. S. Seneviratne, “The Archaeology of the Mega-
lithic Black and Red Ware Complex in Sri Lanka”, Ancient Ceylon, 237–99.
39 Otto Rank, The Myth of the Birth of the Hero. The myth of Kṛṣṇa’s life has
the same elements. His mother had been imprisoned by her brother since it had
been prophesied that her son would cause his death. When Kṛṣṇa is born, he is
exchanged for a girl-child, is brought up in a cowherd’s village, and eventually
he challenges his wicked maternal uncle to combat and kills him, to the great
relief of the people of the city of Mathura who had been oppressed by the
uncle.
40 Mahāvaṃsa, 8.18ff.
41 L.S. Cousins, “Pali Oral Literature”, 1–11.
424 The Past Before Us
the Buddha was a kṣatriya from North India, royalty in Sri Lanka
had perforce to be linked to the appropriate status irrespective of
whether or not such connections existed.
The list of associated kings of Magadha probably came from
Puranic data, although the dynastic order sometimes differs.
Bimbisāra and Ajātaśatru were contemporaries of the Buddha, as
is stated in the Canon, and they precede the Nanda dynasty. These
details of political history attempt to set the chronological frame-
work, and authenticate events, not to mention drawing on the status
of those in power.
In the reign of Tissa the various narratives of the Indian and
Sihala background are brought together with the mission of
Mahinda to Sri Lanka. Tissa, as his title Devānaṃpiya suggests,
knew about and admired the Mauryan king and the coming of a
Buddhist mission led by Mahinda, the son of Aśoka, may have
been a request.42 Mahinda is said to be the son of the pious Devī,
who did not go to Pāṭaliputra when Aśoka became king and
brought up her son and daughter as devout Buddhists. That
Mahinda was the first missionary is reiterated in the inscriptions,
presumably to underline what was believed to be his eminent par-
entage. Mahinda converts Tissa, and the Mahāvihāra monastery is
founded,43 its location having been sanctified presumably by the
Buddha’s flying visits. Subsequent to this the relics of the Buddha
arrive—his alms bowl and part of his collar bone—and these are
duly enshrined. A branch of the Bodhi tree is reverentially planted,
giving additional sanctity to the site of the monastery, now known
as the Mahāmeghavanārāma. This is also symbolic of tradition
and succession—the paramparā and vaṃsa—not being broken or
diverted in coming to Sri Lanka. The relics recreate the sanctity of
Buddhism in the newly converted region. The Sihala community
had been selected to receive and maintain the teaching, and this
necessitated a continuous history.
The representation of Aśoka is extensive. From an evil person—
Caṇḍāsoka—he becomes a pious king—Dhammāsoka—and a
patron of the Saṅgha. Curiously, no mention is made of the Kaliṅga
campaign, referred to by the king in an edict as the event that
42 Mahāvaṃsa, 11.7ff.
43 Mahāvaṃsa, 14.6ff., 15.16ff.
The Monastic Chronicles of Sri Lanka 425
encouraged him along the path of the dhamma. This is curi-
ous because it had the makings of high drama in the hands of
a poet-monk. Aśoka’s father and grandfather are referred to
briefly, and mention is made of the minister Cāṇakya/Kauṭilya. A
later commentary has many narratives of how Cāṇakya selected
Candragupta Maurya, and through a series of intrigues and con-
frontations defeated the Nanda king and made the Maurya the
founder of the new dynasty.44 The expansion of the narrative may
have used oral traditions.
Stories of the coronation of Aśoka are followed by his conver-
sion to Buddhism, the actions of the Thera Tissa Moggaliputta,
and the birth of Aśoka’s first son and daughter, Mahinda and
Saṅghamittā. These various threads are gradually knotted together
in the story of Aśoka calling the monks for the Third Council at
Pāṭaliputra, the expelling of the dissident monks, and the refuta-
tion of dissident doctrines.45 Its significance to Sri Lanka lay in
the Theravāda being declared the true doctrine and in Mahinda’s
mission to Sri Lanka. Because Aśoka is projected as a great patron
of Buddhism, there is some discussion of Mauryan history.
The Śākyan ancestry of Aśoka and the Mauryan family is men-
tioned,46 and its being kṣatriya contradicts the Purāṇas, where the
Mauryas are said to be śūdras. This was necessary to the status
of Aśoka’s son, Mahinda, as coming from the clan of the Buddha
himself, which magnified the value of Mahinda bringing Buddh-
ism to Sri Lanka.47
44 Vaṃsatthappakāsini, 1.5.181ff.
45 An event of this kind may have been the context of the Schism Edict of
Aśoka, as has been suggested. J. Bloch, Les Inscriptions d’Asoka, 152.
46 This is elaborated upon in a later commentary, the Vaṃsatthappakāsini,
ed. G.P. Malalasekera, 180ff. The Mauryas are described as those Śākyas who
fled from Kapilavastu when the king of Kosala attacked the Śākyas for having
deceived him into marrying a slave-girl, instead of the daughter of the ruling
clan who had been promised to him. The group of fleeing Śākyas settled in a
pīpal forest with an abundance of peacocks (mora/mayura), from which their
name derived. This was a later attempt to link the Aśoka of the Mauryan dynasty,
and his son Mahinda, with the family of the Buddha.
47 In a much later Tibetan tradition, the conversion of Sri Lanka is attributed
to the ārya Kṛṣṇa, and no mention is made of any son of Aśoka. However, Kṛṣṇa
sounds an unlikely name for a Buddhist monk. Tāranātha, History of Buddhism
in India, ed. D. Chattopadhyaya, folio 24 A, 72–3.
426 The Past Before Us
The importance of Aśoka to Buddhist historiography lies in his
being projected as a cakkavatti, ruling in accordance with dhamma.
His virtuous deeds also make him something of a bodhisattva, thus
symbolizing a combination of temporal and sacral power. The
king is both the patron of the Saṅgha as well as a lay follower.
Details of the later years of Aśoka are narrated, suggesting attacks
on the Buddhist order, parried by Aśoka. Monasteries and cons-
tructions of religious buildings by royal patrons are mentioned
to emphasize the importance of the Theravāda.48 By this time the
property of the Saṅgha was quite substantial, and a record of this
becomes part of its history.
Another thread in the narrative that gradually assumes greater
visibility is that of the relations with the Damilas in South India.
The focus on this, and on the history of Buddhism in Sri Lanka,
turns the narrative away from events in North India, which now
have less bearing on events in Sri Lanka.
The conflict between the Sihala and Damila rulers continues
for a while since they are chiefs of principalities with quick
turnovers. The next major event is Duṭṭhagāmaṇi’s defence of the
kingdom against Elāra, the Damila. Duṭṭhagāmaṇi destroys the
Damila principalities, re-establishing the royal line and patronage
to the Saṅgha. He is from a collateral line and his antecedents are
not glorified, as one would expect of a hero, although his oust-
ing of Elāra takes on epic proportions. Was it such a devastating
campaign, or was the author trying to divert attention from the
crisis in the Saṅgha? The record of patronage, although somewhat
diminished in disturbed times, is still maintained with the history
of structures and their patrons extending over five chapters.
The opposition to Elāra was political, aggravated by his not
being a patron of the Saṅgha, thereby contributing to its decline.
This seems to be suggested in the startlingly non-Buddhist state-
ment that Duṭṭhagāmaṇi’s karma was not diminished because of
the thousands that he had killed in the war against Elāra, since
they were not Buddhists and therefore not human.49 A similar
48 Mahāvaṃsa, e.g. 26.11–14, 27.2ff., 28.6ff., 29.1–22, 30.42ff., 31.36ff.
49 Mahāvaṃsa, 25,108–11; H.L. Seneviratne, The Work of Kings, 21ff.; also
discussed in J. Dhirasekera, “Texts and Traditions – Warped and Distorted”.
The Monastic Chronicles of Sri Lanka 427
ambivalence regarding ahiṃsā occurs in a commentary, stating
that the yakkhas are incapable of understanding the dhamma and
are opposed to the Saṅgha, therefore violence against them is
permissible.50 Duṭṭhagāmaṇi has been described as an epic hero,
even more so in this chronicle than the earlier one.51
The record begins to change with Vaṭṭagāmaṇi Abhaya, who
expels the Nirgrantha/Jaina sects from their monasteries and es-
tablishes a new monastery, the Abhayagiri-vihāra.52 This rivals the
Mahāvihāra, which it supersedes when the later king Mahāsena
turns hostile to the older monastery.53 The monks of the Abhayagiri-
vihāra separate themselves as the sect of the Abhayagirivādin but
incorporate some elements of Mahāyāna practices, forming a
powerful group, finally leading to a schism. Mahāsena not only
shifted his patronage to the Abhayagiri but also confiscated the
property of the Mahāvihāra, leaving it bereft of power. A rebellion
against Mahāsena persuades him to patronize the Mahāvihāra once
again, which gradually emerges successful from the conflict with
the other monasteries. The Saṅgha seems to have been heavily
into politics, and may have only seemingly distanced itself from
secular power.54 The Aśoka of the Chronicles was depicted as the
firm promoter of the Theravāda sect, unlike the Aśoka of his own
edicts who was willing to accommodate all sects.
There is logic to the structure of the Mahāvaṃsa and the narra-
tives revolve around distinctive themes. It is a politically charged
chronicle: the author, although a monk, was a member of the royal
family and therefore close to court politics; but above all the nar-
rative had to show the superiority of the Theravāda sect and its
triumph in competition with others. It was written at a time when
the Mahāvihāra, having known distress, saw its fortunes improv-
ing. The attitude to the audience had also changed from the century
before, when the Dīpavaṃsa was written. The Dīpavaṃsa was
addressing an audience with which it had some empathy, whereas
50 R.A.L.H. Gunawardana, “The Kinsmen of the Buddha: Myth as Political
Charter in the Ancient and Medieval Kingdoms of Sri Lanka”.
51 W. Geiger, The Dīpavaṃsa and Mahāvaṃsa, 19ff.
52 Mahāvaṃsa, 33.80.
53 Mahāvaṃsa, 37.3ff.
54 S. Kiribamune, “The State and Sangha in Pre-modern Sri Lanka”, 47–76.
428 The Past Before Us
the Mahāvaṃsa strikes a more polemical note. The conflict of the
sects made a validation from history more urgent and the issue be-
came one of who controlled the institutions. The re-establishment
of the Mahāvihāra is projected as heralding the re-establishment
of the kingdom of Laṅkā on a firmer footing than before. This is
reflected in the Mahāvaṃsa, but more so in the Cūlavaṃsa.
4. Subsequent to the Mahāvaṃsa
From the mid-first millennium ad new texts were written, updating
the history of the Theravāda Saṅgha in particular. Complement-
ing the chronicles were the many commentaries on the earlier
texts, both Canonical and non-Canonical. The commentaries were
not just glosses but were partially historical writing, since they
incorporated current explanations of narratives from the past.
The commentaries were in turn commented upon. Pāli conti-
nued to be used, partly because the original texts were in it, and
partly because it gave access to a wider audience than Sanskrit.
Possibly, Sanskrit was too closely associated with brahmanical
and Mahāyāna scholarship, from both of which the Theravādins
were distanced.
Buddhaghosa, who came to Sri Lanka in about the fifth century,
was perhaps the most important exegete, with his annotated com-
mentaries and translated texts, resulting in an extraordinarily large
scholarly output,55 the best-known being the Visuddhimagga, the
Samantapāsādikā, and the Sumaṅgalavilāsinī.56 His work initiates
a renaissance of the Pāli Canon, indirectly giving authority to the
perspective of the Theravāda.
Buddhaghosa makes a point of listing his sources. These in-
cluded popular literature as well as scholarly texts. He referred
55 B.C. Law, Buddhaghosa. Buddhaghosa is associated with the authorship
of, among other texts, the Jñānodaya, Visuddhimagga, the Samantapāsādikā on
the Vinaya Piṭaka, the Sumaṅgalavilāsinī on the Dīgha-nikāya, Papañcasūdanī
on the Majjhima-nikāya; the Sāratthappakāsinī on the Saṃyutta-nikāya, the
Manorathapūraṇī on the Aṅguttara-nikāya, commentaries on the Abhidhamma
Piṭaka, and the Kathāvatthu.
56 H.C. Warren and Dharmanand Kosambi (eds), Visuddhimagga of Buddha­
ghosa.
The Monastic Chronicles of Sri Lanka 429
to, but had little use for, the core narratives of the Mahābhārata
and the Rāmāyaṇa, which he called the Bhārata-yuddha and the
Sītā-haraṇa.57 Narratives relating to the origin of the Śākyas and to
rulers such as Pasenadi of Kosala and Ajātasattu of Magadha were
included.58 His coverage of Indian history remains restricted to the
middle Ganges plain and up to the Aśokan period—the time frame
and geography of the earlier texts. Although it is thought that he
came from South India, he refers to the Andhras and Damilas as
milakkhas/mlecchas (beyond the social pale), and as speaking a
different language, thus indicating a bias in favour of Sanskrit.59
Interestingly, he places Sihala in the same category, and this may
have been an additional reason for translating Sihala texts into Pāli.
For the texts from Sri Lanka he mentions using bhānakas—monks
who transmitted the Canon orally.
Other important commentaries included those of Buddhadatta,
a close contemporary of Buddhaghosa, whose Madhuratha-vilāsinī
was a commentary on the Buddhavaṃsa.60 The style is similar to
that of Buddhaghosa, and the major questions posed to the text
are “by whom was it spoken, where, when, for who’s sake and
for the sake of what?”61
Other commentaries were on the Chronicles, the major one on
the Mahāvaṃsa being the twelfth-century Vaṃsatthappakāsini—
literally, throwing light on the vaṃsa. It carries some additions,
which are likely to have come from the original Sihala Mahāvaṃsa
Aṭṭhakathā.62 Myths of origin, similar to those of the texts, are
also narrated in inscriptions. References are made to both Hīna-
yāna and Mahāyāna schools of Buddhism. The Vaṃsatthappakā-
sini not only fills out the details but presents what one historian
has called a Buddhist imperial world vision.63 This may be a
57 Sumaṅgalavilāsinī, vol. I, 84; volumes II and III appeared in 1931 and
1932.
58 Sumaṅgalavilāsinī, vol. I, 134, 258–60.
59 Sumaṅgalavilāsinī, vol. I, 255.
60 K.L. Hazra, Studies on Pali Commentaries, 89ff.
61 Madhuratha-vilāsinī (trans.); I.B. Horner, The Clarifier of the Sweet
Meaning.
62 Vamsatthappakāsini, lvi–lvii.
63 J.S. Walters, “Buddhist History”, 99–152.
430 The Past Before Us
somewhat exaggerated phrase, but there is in this account a sense
of triumphalism colouring the success of the Theravāda. Since
this commentary is much later, it can take the liberty of selecting
what it regards as the most appropriate from earlier sources and
also refute statements that might have questioned the correctness
of the Mahāvaṃsa version.
Various monks and scholars continued to maintain the chro-
nicles after the writing of the Mahāvaṃsa, with commentaries to
follow, but not all of these have survived. In the twelfth century,
traditions were collated and what came to be called the Cūlavaṃsa
was compiled as a sequel to the Mahāvaṃsa. A further addition
to this was made in the fourteenth century, and then again in the
eighteenth century, and ultimately the narrative was brought up to
1815, after which the kingdom was annexed by the British.64 The
continuation of the tradition is significant. There was recognition
of the importance of having an authoritative history related to the
Saṅgha, and the need therefore to update the chronicle.
The thirteenth century saw the composition of the Dāṭhavaṃsa
and the Thūpavaṃsa, among other histories, where the focus was
on the history of objects and relics, such as the Tooth of the Bud-
dha. The relic, like all relics, became the idiom of a special symbol,
in this case kingship, and was fought over by claimants. There
seems to have been a spurt of interest in historical writing at this
time, perhaps because of further sectarian conflict referred to in
the texts and the need to renew legitimizing the Theravāda.
The tradition of maintaining the chronicle was regarded as
important and necessary, even though during this period other
texts with a flavour of history—such as biographies of kings and
royal succession—were also written. Two texts on these subjects,
both of a later period, have been described as secular histories:
the Rājaratnākara and the Rājāvalī. There was by now a routine
practice of consulting earlier texts in order to write the past afresh.
The philosophical tradition was familiar to both brahmanical and
Buddhist scholars, and this enhanced the force of the debate.
Hermeneutics and exegeses were a continuing intellectual exer-
cise. Buddhaghosa’s work on the Abhidhamma strengthened the
64 L.S. Perera, “The Pali Chronicles of Ceylon”, 31–2.
The Monastic Chronicles of Sri Lanka 431
theological base of the Theravāda. This probably was his inten-
tion, for he barely mentions other theories, such as those current
in the Abhayagiri monastery. The Mahāvihāra was in the process
of rebuilding its base and the writings of Buddhaghosa were an
asset.
5. Chronicles from Elsewhere
The writing of chronicles was not limited to Sri Lankan Buddh-
ism, although I have taken these as an example. From the late first
millennium ad, chronicles recorded the arrival and establishment
of Buddhism in various regions, and history was a part of this
story. The Tibetan Lama Tāranātha, in his much-quoted sixteenth-
century History of Buddhism in India, intersperses the reigns of
kings with Buddhist teachers, with prominence given to Aśoka.
He refers to three periods when the Buddhists were persecuted
but the doctrine survived. These were the reigns of Puṣyamitra
Śuṅga (second century bc), the time of Turuṣkas in Kashmir
(? The Hūṇas of the fifth century ad), and the burning of the
Nalanda Library by tirthikas (non-Buddhists) in the monastery.
For him, the Third Council was the one held in Kashmir and asso-
ciated with Kaniṣka.
He refers to the many sources that he consulted when writing
the book, particularly the sections on the kings of eastern India.
Long accounts from various texts included the Buddhapurāṅa of
Indradatta, and the works of paṇḍita Kṣembhadra of Magadha
and paṇḍita Bhaṭāghāṭi.65
Others from western Tibet and the adjoining Himalayan region
tend to be brief, the exception being the Chronicles pertaining to
Ladakh, which draw on a range of sources.66 The structure and
function of these Chronicles is similar to those from Sri Lanka,
though of course the context is different. The pattern of the nar-
rative is familiar, as is the intention. The first section sets out the
65 Tāranātha, History of Buddhism in India, folio 139-A, 350. See also
pp. 121, 137, 141. Peter Skilling kindly drew my attention to this passage.
66 A.H. Francke, Antiquities of Indian Tibet; L. Petech, A Study of the Chro­
nicles of Ladakh; R. Thapar, “Antecedents, Religious Sanctions and Political
Legitimation in the Ladakh Chronicles”, in Cultural Pasts, 173–92.
432 The Past Before Us
myths describing primitive conditions, delving into the Northern
Buddhist tradition and the Tibetan Chronicles. The second refers to
the coming of Buddhism and introduces data from Tibetan sources
and from the history of the other neighbour, Kashmir. Wherever
Buddhism was present, connections needed to be established.
Campaigns and treaties were required in many directions. The
third section focuses on events concerning Ladakh, and where
royal patronage is as important as political events. The data began
to be collected in the second millennium by monks in the more
established monasteries.
The equivalent of Aśoka was the seventh-century king Songtsen
Gampo in Tibet, and the sixteenth-century Senge Namgyal in
Ladakh, both of whom were patrons of Buddhism. The history of
the state seems to merge with the history of the religion. Buddh-
ism in Tibet and Ladakh was not the alternative belief system but
the established religion, as was the case in Sri Lanka. This may
account for the greater emphasis on chronicles rather than bio-
graphies.
6. Buddhist Monastic Chronicles:
Tradition as History
The Buddhist chronicle tradition is more recognizably historical
than the Puranic. There is generally a systematic narrative within
a chronological framework and a clear purpose, namely, upholding
the Saṅgha. The Chronicles enhanced the prestige of the Saṅgha,
helped by being hinged on the historical person of the Buddha.
This was not necessarily based on historical accuracy, but was
strengthened by suggesting that it was historical. The monastic
chronicle is in effect the chronicle of sectarian activities and the
literature incorporates narratives of the patrons of the Saṅgha
who were frequently persons in power. Political authority gives
an edge to such patrons, for even where wealthy citizens made
donations, often as handsome grants, they did not bring the aura
of royal authority. This is evident from a comparison between
the Chronicles and votive inscriptions recording donations to
the Saṅgha during the period under discussion.67 The interplay
67 L.S. Perera, The Institutions of Ancient Ceylon from Inscriptions, vol. I.
The Monastic Chronicles of Sri Lanka 433
between religion and political power is evident. The scholarly
monks who were the authors of the Chronicles assumed a courtly
milieu as their context. Versions of sectarian conflict heightened
the context of time and heresy. The institutional foundation of the
Chronicles added to their sense of specificity.
The projection of Aśoka as the patron par excellence uses his-
tory for sectarian purposes. The Chronicles seem to suggest that
the establishing of Theravāda in Sri Lanka stems from various
decisions taken by Aśoka: residing over the Council at Pāṭaliputra,
sending Mahinda as a missionary, and his close relationship with
Devānaṃpiya Tissa. Yet Aśoka has little to say on such connec-
tions. Barring the hint that the Schism Edict may have followed
from the Council, it is noticeable that Aśoka refers to Taṃbapani/
Tāmraparṇi—possibly Sri Lanka—rather in passing and more
as a limit of his southern frontier.68 There is no indication in his
edicts of any special relationship with Sri Lanka, not even in his
more retrospective Pillar Edicts. It would seem that Māhanāma
exaggerated the contours of the relationship, for obvious histori-
cal reasons. One may object to the exaggeration, but one has to
recognize the centrality of the resort to history.
The Chronicles and the commentaries on them are essentially
the history of the Theravāda in Sri Lanka.69 That a more wide-
ranging history is also reflected can be observed in the historical
process of change, of chiefdoms mutating into kingdoms, and
these into early and late state systems, although the change is
not described in these terms.70 The narrative goes back briefly to
origins in northern India. The organization of the early Saṅgha in
India used the gaṇa-saṅgha system of chiefdoms as its model. The
Saṅgha as described in the Chronicles points to a different context,
one in which the state and kingship are central. Buddhism arrives
when this change has just occurred in Sri Lanka. The paradox is
that now the success of Buddhism is projected as requiring an
endorsement from the state and royal authority.
The Chronicles depict a difference between societies of the
68 J. Bloch, Les Inscriptions d’Asoka, 93, 130.
69 H. Bechert, “Theravāda Buddhist Saṅgha: Some General Observations on
Historical and Political Factors in its Development”, 761–78.
70 R.A.L.H. Gunawardana, Periodisation in Sri Lankan History.
434 The Past Before Us
pre-Buddhist and Buddhist times. Earlier, the record shows con-
flict between the existing population and migrant settlers, the latter
being resented as encroachers. The migrants are said to be of a
higher social status, and from them emerge the ruling families of
later times. Territorially, the existing population, generally not a
peasantry, can live only within the limits of the forests and come
to be identified with the mleccha—those outside the social pale.
Physical boundaries often defined social boundaries, and even
the vihāra has its sīmā (boundaries). Kingship is accompanied
by the appropriation of Mauryan symbols of power, perhaps to
reiterate the change. The politics are those of rival chiefdoms and
kingdoms, until the kingdom at Anurādhapura comes to dominate
politics.
The monks, originally housed in rock-cut cells, move into
monasteries in the vicinity of settlements and of the capital. The
king, as patron, gifted buildings to the Saṅgha. Among these are
included large water reservoirs, constructed under royal patronage,
changing the resource base of the region to wet rice cultivation.
This encourages land being granted to monasteries and eventually
results in what has been called monastic landlordism.71 Such grants
meant a judicial and financial immunity from royal officials, which
immunity buttressed a status already equivalent to the landowning
nobility and higher bureaucracy. Given this, monastic participation
in politics would have been expected. That Mahāsena confiscated
the property of the Mahāvihāra was part of the crisis.72
Maintaining property was recognized as one category of the
monk’s work, apart from meditation and recitation, and some
bhikṣus/bhikkhus had also to work in a managerial capacity, even
performing other jobs. These duties were classified at some length,
with comments on supervisory tasks. If rosters had to be kept,
records would be the next step.73
The extensive enshrining and worshipping of relics in vari-
ous parts of the subcontinent led to monuments and structures
71 H.H. Gerth and C.W. Mills (eds), From Max Weber, 332ff.; Max Weber,
Economy and Society, vol. II, 586ff.; R.A.L.H. Gunawardana, Robe and Plough,
Monasticism and Economic Interest in Early Medieval Sri Lanka.
72 Mahāvaṃsa, 37.8–9, 36ff.
73 J. Silk, Managing Monks, 22ff., 98ff., 160ff.
The Monastic Chronicles of Sri Lanka 435
attracting a large lay following. This was seen as a catchment of
support for the royal patron, which consolidated the authority of
the state and of the sect it patronized.
Manipulation of succession is partially an indication of changed
relations between the central state and its dependencies. This is
also reflected in splinter groups of the Saṅgha getting access to
patronage, as in the rise of the Abhayagiri faction. Such segmenta-
tion requires an acceleration of claims to legitimacy, and therefore
a greater inclusion of political factions in the narrative.
These changes are also reflected in the titles given to rulers.
Gāmaṇi refers to an important person, a chief or headman or
leader, and not necessarily a king.74 Duṭṭhagāmaṇi is clearly the
former at the start, and only later does he become a regular king
or mahārāja. The use of the title mahārāja in the Mahāvaṃsa
was either restricted to monks addressing the king or used for
those highly respected. This may be a reflection of its wider use
at the time. That both Vijaya and Devānaṃpiya Tissa are called
mahārāja does not make them equal in terms of royal status, since
the status implicit in the title was not unchanging over time.
The sacral power of the Saṅgha is symbolized in the bhikkhu,
the renunciate monk. The notion of divinity is absent. The bhikkhu
who collects alms from the settlement is not the ultimate renun-
ciate, for he is basically changing one order of life for another.
Joining the order of monks or nuns remains a social role since
both the monk and the monastery are dependent on society.75 The
sacred cannot be manipulated for political ends, but the mahāthera
as head of the monastery had a relationship with the king that
required a balance of the two.
The writing of chronicles indicates that despite Buddhism be-
ing established in some regions, a historical tradition was neces-
sary to buttress it, a need heightened by not only non-Buddhist
neighbours but also the competition between the various Buddhist
sects. Underlining the history of the religion was not enough. The
authority of a particular sect had to be justified, even drawing on
74 T. Hettiarachchy, History of Kingship in Ceylon upto the Fourth Cen ­
tury ad.
75 R. Thapar, “Renunciation: The Making of a Counter-culture?”, in Cultural
Pasts, 876–913.
436 The Past Before Us
secular governance. Furthermore, kingship had come to be recog-
nized as the sole legitimate political institution: hence the attempt
to record king lists from Devānaṃpiya Tissa of the third century
bc to Mahāsena of the fourth century ad. As in the case of the
Purāṇas, so too with the Ceylon Chronicles, this was the crucial
period when the historical tradition had to be formalized and
prised out of floating oral traditions. The form taken by the various
categories of texts could differ, but their underlying similarity as
projects towards establishing a historical tradition is visible.
The Buddhist Saṅgha, now also playing a political role, needed
to establish its status as the pre-eminent religious institution. One
way of doing this was by endorsing kingship. A historical tradition
was needed to explain the economic power of the monasteries, to
indicate when and how and for which pious purposes the Saṅgha
obtained an endowment or a grant. To prevent the image of the
Saṅgha becoming that of just another avaricious institution, the
morality and piety of its actions, which brought the Saṅgha wealth,
had to be emphasized or even exaggerated, going back to earlier
times. The doctrine had been subject to numerous controversies,
the major ones being sorted out at the various Councils, the lesser
ones continuing at a less obvious level and giving way to yet newer
ones. Sectarian differences and loyalties required a record of the
patriarchs and Elders of the Saṅgha, the Theras, whose particular
interpretations of the doctrines were to be followed. This intensi-
fies the rivalry among the sectarian Saṅghas—as narrated for ins-
tance in that between the Mahāvihāra and the Abhayagiri-vihāra.
From the mid-first millennium the Theravāda at the Mahāvihāra
gained ascendancy, lauding the Theravāda interpretation of
the doctrine and its version of Buddhism in Sri Lanka. These
chronicles are statements from the Mahāvihāra–Theravāda pers-
pective. Had anything similar survived from the Abhayagiri monas -
tery, the context would have been even sharper and the Mahāvihāra
version contested. This suggests the process of how a hegemonic
reli gious institution can consolidate its authority by deploying
historical narrative to its advantage. The process has been re-
cognized in other institutions in modern times, but is rarely used
in analysing similar institutions of the early past. The question
that needs to be addressed is whether the history of a religious
The Monastic Chronicles of Sri Lanka 437
institution as a disguised defence of political power is not in effect
also a project of writing history.76
The proselytizing mission of Buddhism is said to have become
active after the Third Council at Pāṭaliputra. Records of these
missions were presumably kept. By the fifth century ad, with
Buddhism having centres in Central and South East Asia, increas-
ing sectarian rivalries sought sanction from their own attempts at
constructing historical traditions, as is evident from the literature
of Northern Buddhism. Introducing Buddhism to new areas, both
within the subcontinent and elsewhere, meant having to accom-
modate local rituals, belief systems, and ideas, an accommodation
requiring concessions on both sides.
Historicity was subjected to the niceties of the kāvya or poetic
style, where literary embellishment could override precision in
factual narration. Moral lessons were also to be drawn from the
past, particularly from the action of kings. Patronage ranked high
in the list of meritorious actions. There is an attempt to provide
a historical framework by referring to ruling kings, providing in
addition a chronological cross-reference.77 Such histories were
prob ably taken from various traditions, some no longer available,
and given a Buddhist gloss. The centrality of Aśoka is a striking
contrast to his being a mere name in a king-list in Puranic sources.
After Aśoka the history of the middle Ganges plain recedes and
other areas such as South India and later Kaliṅga are more fre-
quently mentioned.
The importance of kingship perhaps also draws on the idea that
the Buddha could either have become a cakkavatti or a bodhisattva;
the duality is that of conquest or renunciation. However, this dual-
ity is not as sharp as is sometimes suggested in modern writing.
It is as well to keep in mind that the cakkavatti was a conqueror
but not given to violence. The practise of law, justice, and righte-
ous rule made a worthy king. This was not the kṣatriya ethic of
conquest by the digvijayin. The bodhisattva ideal allows the king
76 Rukun Advani has pointed to a comparison with the study of the Sikh
Khalsa as analysed by H. Oberoi, The Construction of Religious Boundaries, as
one among other such works on this theme.
77 Mahāvaṃsa, xli.
438 The Past Before Us
to become a source of both political and religious power, and the
two form an interface.
A moot question is whether dhamma is to be read as religion
or in a broader context as social ethics. The cakkavatti, as pro-
moter and protector of the dhamma, is not merely a factor in the
well-being of the Saṅgha. He is also concerned with rājadhamma
laying emphasis on the nature of governance. Although there is a
seeming contradiction in conquest and renunciation, nevertheless
acting righteously is what determines each. Thus the ideal politi-
cal state was one governed by dhamma. The rituals of kingship
can be brahmanical but the ethic has to be Buddhist.78 Kings from
history who were quoted as close to the ideal are Bimbisāra and
Pasenadi. Neither of these were Buddhists and Pasenadi is known
to have performed brahmanical rituals, but both are thought to
have ruled according to the dhamma.79 However, the problem
is that the social articulation of the ethic differs. In theory, the
Buddhist ethic does not admit of divine intervention or of inequal-
ity in a society, whereas the brahmanical ethic gets its sanction
from the intervention of deity and the inequalities of varṇa.
The close relationship between the king and the Saṅgha, as sup-
posedly practised by Aśoka, is consciously emulated by Devānaṃ-
piya Tissa and later by Parakkambāhu/Parākramabāhu I.80 There
is a correlation with Damila power and patronage, for each time
the Damilas are defeated the Saṅgha revives. In conditions of
adversity where the king was required to consolidate power,
the monastic networks could be a support—provided there was
harmony among the sects and between them and the king. Where
sectarian conflicts prevailed, political factionalism was also preva-
lent, as with Mahāvihāra and Abhayagiri. Where sects other than
Buddhists were also present, such as the Jainas/Nirgranthas and
the Ājīvikas,81 there could be further tension.
The need to maintain a historical record becomes necessary
78 R. Lingat, Royautes Bouddhiques, 63ff.
79 T. Ling, The Buddha; R. Heine-Geldern, Concept of State and Kingship
in Southeast Asia.
80 T. Hettiarachchy, History of Kingship in Ceylon upto the Fourth Century
ad, 166ff.
81 Mahāvaṃsa, 10.96–102.
The Monastic Chronicles of Sri Lanka 439
when rival sectarian conflicts threaten those that are established,
or when new ones become powerful. The Damila political threat
to the Mahāvihāra coincided with the Canon being given a more
permanent written form. The history of the Mahāvihāra becomes
particularly necessary when the Abhayagiri sect becomes a suc-
cessful competitor, and more so when it supersedes, however
briefly, the earlier institution. Establishing the rights of rival
monast eries also encouraged the keeping of historical records and
claiming ancient ancestry. The Abhayagiri schism traces itself back
to the Vajjiputtas at the Council of Vaiśāli in an obvious attempt
to give itself an ancestry as old, or older, than the Theravāda.
The Mahāvihāra attacked the new doctrines.82 Why Vaṭṭagāmaṇi
supported the Abhayagiri schism has a complex political answer.
Built on an earlier Jaina/Nirgrantha site which Vaṭṭagāmaṇi
wished to destroy, the initial move may have been only against
the Nirgranthas and associated sects. But when he recognized the
political potential of a new monastic focus, he may have decided
to patronize a new sect, and it was this potential that needled the
Mahāvihāra—or this is how the latter seems to have viewed it.
When the Mahāvihāra regains its position, its history becomes
imperative afresh. The Dīpavaṃsa is insufficient. The Mahāvaṃsa
has a more definitive agenda and sharpens the focus of the con-
flict, and, above all, of its pre-eminence. This is maintained in sub -
sequent histories, which cover every aspect of the support for
the Theravāda—royal patronage, other monasteries, relics, and
stūpas.
It was a time of many debates on the interpretation of the doc -
trine, with contests between the sects supporting either the
Hīnayāna or the Mahāyāna schools. The expansion of the latter
sects extended the horizon of the debates. It was thought that there
was some Mahāyāna teaching in Sri Lanka.83 If the Abhayagiri
and Jetavana monasteries were also centres of important tradi-
tions, and had their versions survived in the same way as those
82 W.M.K. Wijetunga, “The Spread of Heterodox Buddhist Doctrines in
Early Ceylon”, 14–28.
83 J.C. Holt, Buddha in the Crown: Avalokitesvara in the Buddhist Tradition
of Sri Lanka.
440 The Past Before Us
of the Mahāvihāra, a comparative study would have been useful
to understanding the rivalry. Mention of the Theravāda comes
fairly late in the texts and may more often have been subsumed
in references to the Mahāvihāra.
It was therefore required that the history of the Mahāvihāra
should explicitly restate the monastery as the legitimate and re-
cognized Saṅgha, and that the history of Sri Lanka up to that point
be co-opted into the history of the Mahāvihāra monastery. The
requirement of history could also result from political conflict
where the authors of the tradition supported one party against the
other.84 Thus the Saṅgha supported Duṭṭhagāmaṇi against Elāra,
arguing that the former was defending Buddhism. Was the conflict
deliberately posed in these terms? In taking over the Duṭthagāmaṇi
epic, was the author converting it conveniently into a story sup-
porting the Saṅgha? The opposition was fierce at times, and is
reminiscent of other heresies and inquisitions when books were
burnt and monks banished. The king, Mahāsena, also destroyed
brahmanical shrines, and the connection with South India was part
of the politics of this region—given the presence of the Damilas. It
was not just a conflict over religious belief, because even the two
Buddhist sects were fiercely opposed. Mahāsena becomes king
after a fairly long period of quick turnovers among rulers and
disturbed conditions resulting from usurpers and rebels, both
Sihala and Damila.
The Dīpavaṃsa and the Mahāvaṃsa were written subsequent to
two crises in Theravāda Buddhism. The first was when the Damilas
from South India began to rule intermittently and were not patrons
of the Mahāvihāra. Yet the Dīpavaṃsa is not as hostile to them as
the later Chronicle, which makes much of Duṭṭhagāmaṇi defeat-
ing the Damilas. The second crisis had greater gravity when in the
conflict between the Mahāvihāra and the Abhayagiri-vihāra the
king almost extinguished the Mahāvihāra. The Chronicles date
to when the Mahāvihāra was rejuvenated and its success in doing
so was strengthened by legitimacy from history.
Royal favour virtually controls the fortunes of the Mahāvihāra.
This is somewhat surprising as the votive inscriptions from
84 E.g., Cūlavaṃsa, 37.53–90.
The Monastic Chronicles of Sri Lanka 441
various places suggest a substantial and continuous lay follow-
ing. The Chronicles were focusing on events in the capital
Anurādhapura. The schisms in the Saṅgha were not restricted to
controversies over the teachings or the regulations for monks and
extended into court politics. The resort to narratives of a believed
history were intended as indicating the truth of the doctrine, il-
lustrating once again the role of history in the projection of what
we today call ideology.
Chronicles were, thus, a significant form taken by the Buddhist
historical tradition. Ideas of a historical past were embedded in the
Canon. It was now less a question of adjusting regulations listed
in the Canon and more of making a new bid for the authority of
the Saṅgha. The Chronicle became the form for this and was a
category of text external to the Canon. This was not necessarily
the pattern in every region where Buddhism was present. In north-
western India, for instance, there appears to have been a greater
investment in biographies and biographical fragments contributing
to the historical tradition.
11
Buddhist Biographies
1. Early Biographies
Moving away from the history of the Saṅgha and from
monastic chronicles, another kind of text came to be
used to narrate the Buddhist view of the past through
biographies of the Buddha, or personalized narratives underlining
his ideas. Partial biographies included those of persons important
to the history of Buddhism, predictably the emperor Aśoka. The
biographical genre required the subject to be presented in a his-
torical form for the narrative to be viable. Inevitably, therefore,
the earliest biographies evoked the canonical tradition. However,
whereas in the Pāli Buddhist tradition biographies are few, with
narratives on the Saṅgha and monasteries being frequent, biogra-
phies seem to have been more popular in the Northern tradition. A
possible reason may have been that the Saṅgha in north-western
India did not have as close a relationship with royalty as did the
Mahāvihāra, nor as fierce a rivalry with other Buddhist sects com-
peting for status.
The writing of such biographies comes into its own at the turn
of the Christian era and the early centuries ad. The biography was
not necessarily a life history from birth to death, for often, only
the salient events were narrated. Nor was the biography always
devoid of hagiography, particularly in the case of the Buddha.
The Buddhavaṃsa narrates the succession of the previous
twenty-four Buddhas and provides a prelude to Gautama,1 tak-
ing the narrative back to asankhya (uncountable) kappas (eons)
1 R. Morris (ed.), The Buddhavaṃsa and the Cariya-piṭaka.
Buddhist Biographies 443
and underlining the impermanence of time.2 Utopian beginnings
are exaggerated, while the chronicle of Gautama becomes more
realistic. This was doubtless intended both as ancestry and as
contrast. It traces the evolution of a bodhisattva to Buddhahood,
thus claiming to cover a span of history from remote antiquity, to
less remote history, and eventually to recent history. These time
divisions become axiomatic to representing the past history of
the Buddhas.
Reference to the Buddha to come, the Buddha Maitreya/Metteya,
was a logical continuation of the Buddhavaṃsa and the increasing
visibility of Maitreya as the future Buddha. Mentioned some-
what in passing in the Dīgha-nikāya, he comes into his own by the
early Christian era. The projection of a future Buddha had several
reasons: schisms, splits, and the persecutions of sects which, in
desperation, have to believe in the impending arrival of a saviour;
the ambience of the times, which required every religion to have
such a figure—St John of the Revelations among Christians,
Saosh yant among Zoroastrians, Kalkin among Vaiṣṇavas; and
the downswing in the cycle of time which brings the fear of a
cataclysm before the upswing begins.3 A collection of texts, the
Anāgatavaṃsa, presents a history of the future where Metteya plays
a central role. His utopia will bring ample wealth and no labour.
Desire, hunger, and old age will disappear and men and women
will live to an extraordinary age. His dispensation will last for
101,000 years. Calculating in millennia could favour a forward
projection of history.4
A seeming link to the idea of a future Buddha was the discus-
sion on the decline of the saddharma (the good law), conforming
to the general decline of the human condition.5 In this case, the
deterioration will be of the Saṅgha, and of its monks who will stop
observing the precepts, and foreign kings who will attack Buddh-
ists. A distinction is made, however, between the immutability
2 The Minor Anthologies of the Pali Canon, vol. III.
3 R. Thapar, “Millenarianism and Religion in Early India”, in Cultural Pasts,
946–61.
4 S. Collins, Selfless Persons: Imagery and Thought in Thervāda Buddhism,
355.
5 E. Lamotte, History of Indian Buddhism, 191ff.
444 The Past Before Us
of the teaching and the existence of the Saṅgha. The first cannot
disappear but the second can be evanescent. Attempts were made
to calculate precisely when this would happen, but the date kept
shifting—from 500 years after the mahāparinirvāṇa to 1500 years.
The early termination is linked in some texts to the admission of
women into the Order. Tibetan sources refer to a longer time span
of 2000 to 3000 years. Buddhaghosa extends it to 5000 years and
some Chinese commentaries take it to 12,000 years.
The Nidāna-kathā is also a narration of the lineage of the
Buddhas, not in terms of family and descent but as a succession
of Buddhas.6 The life of Gautama is reiterated from the Canon
but punctuated with miraculous events at crucial points. Hints of
divinity shift the focus from his teaching to his person. The narra-
tives are stylistically different from the brief biographies in earlier
texts. The Buddhas appear with regularity, although not quite like
avatāras since they do not take diverse forms.
Early elements of the Buddha biography are recorded in con-
versational form, and in ballad style in the Sutta-nipāta of the
Khuddaka-nikāya.7 Parallel to this are the Jātakas, which mix
narratives supposedly of the past with a Buddhist moral, the nar-
rative serving as argument.8 They are reminiscent of some revised
versions of epic stories which illustrate a moral point, except that
the Jātaka stories do so invariably. The opening sentence of many
stories attempts a historical flavour via references to a place, a
time, and a ruler. The Jātakas range from fables emphasizing the
importance of nīti (ethics) and politics, to tales, anecdotes, sayings,
and pious legends with a moral, and are told in the form of narra-
tives, ballads, and small epics. Those with an itihāsa connection
are possibly drawn from a wider oral tradition and correspond to
the stereotypes in such narratives, as for example the theme of
exile, used to great effect in the Vessantara Jātaka.9 Exile can be
a motif in a narrative, or it can be part of a historical perspective
encapsulating the settlement and colonization of a new area. Story
6 T.W. Rhys Davids, Buddhist Birth Stories.
7 D. Anderson and H. Smith (eds), The Suttanipāta, Pabbaja-sutta 3.1; Padhana-
sutta 3.2; Nalaka-sutta 3.11.
8 M. Winternitz, History of Indian Literature, vol. II, 113ff.
9 Vessantara Jātaka, no. 547, in The Jātaka, ed. E.B. Cowell; see also
nos. 461, 523, 539, and 544.
Buddhist Biographies 445
lines were borrowed indiscriminately across traditions but given
a sectarian twist.
The Kathāvatthu of the Abhidhamma Piṭaka relates events in
the history of Buddhism,10 but is not accepted by all Buddhist
sects. It takes the form of a clarification of the doctrine through a
catechism which also touches on episodes of the Buddha’s life.11
References are also made in a systematic way to the various sects
and their interpretations of the doctrine. The Theravāda claims
that this text was compiled by Tissa Moggaliputta for use in the
Third Council at Pāṭaliputra, but some other sects disagree. Even
if this contention is correct, the text was probably augmented each
time there was a new controversy. Thus, at one level, the historical
material was built into the Canon through the sheer necessity of
maintaining a record of disputations and controversies. The pre-
sent version of the Kathāvatthu dates to the early centuries ad.
Biographies of the Buddha are also part of the collections relat-
ing to the Sarvāstivāda sect. According to Theravāda history, this
sect had split off at the Council at Pāṭaliputra and was influential
in Mathura, Kashmir, and Gandhāra. The texts that ensued are
often written in Hybrid Sanskrit. Earlier forms are likely to have
been written in the regional Gāndhārī Prākrit, which survive in
fragments. The Sanskrit Canon is more fully available in Tibetan
and Chinese translations used by the missions to these areas.12
Some major non-Canonical works, such as the Buddhacarita,
Mahāvastu, Lalitavistara, and Divyāvadāna, were also written in
Sanskrit or Hybrid Sanskrit. In a comparison of the Pāli and Sans-
krit Canon there is corroboration in some and divergence at other
points. This acts as a useful means of correlating statements from
one source to another.
Biography hints at a tendency to individualism and this may
be ascribed to the initial growth of Buddhism at urban centres.13
In the early phase the ideal Buddhist was the arhant—he who
10 M. Winternitz, History of Indian Literature, vol. II, 169ff.; Kathāvatthu,
vols I and II; Shwe Zan Aung and C. Rhys Davids (trans.), Points of Controversy,
The Kathāvatthu.
11 Shwe Zan Aung and C. Rhys Davids (trans.), Points of Controversy, e.g.,
1.3.2ff., 1.5.15, 1.1.243, 2.3.20, 2.7–11, 3.1.1–16, 18.5.1–5, 21.4.1–5.
12 M. Winternitz, History of Indian Literature, vol. II, 227ff.
13 E. Conze, A Short History of Buddhism.
446 The Past Before Us
is free from desire and consequently from rebirth. Later, the
bodhisattva emerged as the role-model in trying to help others
towards nirvāṇa. The focus then moves to the siddha who ac-
quires powers over the cosmos. Each of these phases produces
its own Canonical literature, although there is a flow from one
to the other. The biography of the Buddha was encouraged by
the fact that the Buddha was a historical person. The two central
events—his enlightenment and his death—become pivotal. His
ashes and small bones, venerated as relics, perhaps encouraged the
continuity of presence, annulling time. Later, when the Buddha
was viewed as a transcendental being and not merely as a histori-
cal person, this view changed. The degree to which the Buddha
was projected as human became controversial and the worship
of his bodily relics became central to ritual. The physical body
is also important in demarcating the thirty-two auspicious marks
of the man who is destined to be either a Buddha or a cakravartin
(universal monarch).
The concern with the history of Buddhism and the biography of
the Buddha was not, as we have seen, confined to Canonical litera-
ture. Towards the turn of the Christian era non-Canonical writing
developed around these themes. Thus the avadānas—celebrating
great and glorious religious deeds—relate stories of the Buddha or
of bodhisattvas or of important persons, and present them as part
of the past. The Buddhāvadāna is among the earliest narrating the
glory of the historical Buddha; of the paccekabuddhas, who have
become enlightened but do not proclaim the doctrine; and of the
important Theras and Therīs (monks and nuns).14 The avadānas
have a clearly defined format. They begin with an adoration of a
previous Buddha by a past devotee, with the former then prophesy-
ing the rebirth of the devotee and the discovery of the Buddha by
the devotee. Patrons of the Buddhist Saṅgha are the protagonists
in the new versions of the past. The avadānas had elements of
biography but were distinct from the caritas (biographies).
2. The Buddhacarita
The most impressive biography of the Buddha was undoubtedly
the Buddhacarita of Aśvaghoṣa, dated to the first century ad or
14 M. Winternitz, History of Indian Literature, vol. II, 158ff.
Buddhist Biographies 447
soon after.15 It has on occasion been described as hagiography;
nevertheless it remains a valuable demonstration of how biogra-
phy was used as a form of history. As late as the seventh–eighth
centuries, Chinese Buddhist monks visiting India referred to the
popularity of the Buddhacarita as still read or sung in recitation.16
Of the seventeen chapters of the text, only the first thirteen are
authenticated as the work of Aśvaghoṣa, the latter four being
attributed to a later author. The original Buddhacarita covered the
life of the Buddha, but the existing Sanskrit text stops soon after
the enlightenment—the later chapters exist in a Chinese transla-
tion. The former are characterized by high quality Sanskrit courtly
poetry. Some ideas parallel narratives in the Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa
and the Jātakas, since any serious literary person would have been
familiar by this time with the Vālmīki text.17 That the Śākyas and
the lineage of Rāma were said to be of the Sūryavaṃśa may have
strengthened the connection,
The question has been asked whether the Buddhacarita was writ-
ten both as a fine biography of the Buddha and also as a defence of
Buddhism against brahmanical attacks.18 As we have seen, recent
views have argued for the late books of the Mahābhārata being in
part responses to the competitive popularity of Buddhism, making
Rāma and Yudhiṣṭhira symbols of dharma. Could the Buddha -
carita have also been partially a response to this debate?
Aśvaghoṣa’s knowledge of the Śānti parvan of the Mahābhārata
is evident from his discussion on kingship and ethics—a matter of
primary concern to the rājadharma section of the Śānti parvan and
to the Buddhist understanding of kingship, all of the ongoing de-
bate. This had doubtless been fuelled by Aśoka endorsing a social
ethic akin to the Buddhist as his way of governance. Aśvaghoṣa’s
depiction of Māra, the evil one, taunting the Buddha on the eve
of his enlightenment—urging him to follow his svadharma, his
15 The Buddhacarita or the Acts of the Buddha; Life of the Buddha by Ashva-
ghosha; A. Hiltebeitel, “Aśvaghoṣa’s Buddhacarita: The First Known Close and
Careful Reading of the Brahmanical Sanskrit Epics”, 229–86.
16 E.g., I Tsing, quoted in S. Beal, The Romantic Legend of Sakya Buddha,
256ff.
17 Buddhacarita, 1.43, 6.36, 8.8, 8.81, 9.9.
18 Life of the Buddha by Ashvaghosha, xixff.; Aśvaghoṣa’s Buddhacarita, or
Acts of the Buddha, Introduction by E.H. Johnston (trans.).
448 The Past Before Us
varṇa duty as a kṣatriya and be a king and a warrior rather than a
renunciate—suggests parallels with the dialogue in the Bhagavad-
Gītā. The equating of Māra with Kṛṣṇa is telling!19
The high point in the Buddhacarita is the Buddha’s enlighten-
ment towards which the action moves. Conversions are described
as the digvijaya of the Buddha, invoking a simile from heroic
literature. This is underlined by frequent comparisons with epic
heroes such as Yayāti, Janaka, Bhīṣma, Mandhātṛ, Purūravas,
and Śantanu, depending on the context. The discourse relates to
kṣatriyas and it is the earlier heroes of the Sūryavaṃśa who are
the role-models. The Buddha’s kṣatriya antecedents are heavily
underlined, prior to his being chronologically associated with the
kings of early dynasties. This suggests some shift in emphasis.
The Buddha’s upbringing follows that of a royal prince of con -
temporary times. In this the author shows little historical aware-
ness that the Śākya clan would have functioned differently, a
difference that would have been evident on a careful reading of
the Sutta Piṭaka. Some persons familiar from other Buddhist texts
are introduced, such as Bimbisāra trying to dissuade Gautama
from asceticism. The kernel of belief in this text lay in devotion
to the Buddha and this, as has been noticed, was parallel to the
worship of the Puranic deities in the form of bhakti—devotion to
and sharing in the grace of the deity, and to that extent differs from
the Pāli Canon. But the insistence on the historicity of the Buddha
remains central, perhaps also hinting at a dialogue between the
Buddhist authors and the emergent Puranic tradition, despite the
latter reviling the Buddha.20
That a pattern developed for the Buddha biography is evident
from a still later Tibetan biography.21 Here the origin myth goes
back to timeless time, followed by the story of Mahāsammata
and the subsequent genealogy and origin of the Śākyas. The life
of the Buddha coincides chronologically with the kingdoms of
Kosala, Magadha, Avanti, Kauśāmbī, and the confederacy of the
19 A. Hiltebeitel, “Aśvaghoṣa’s Buddhacarita: The First Known Close and
Careful Reading of the Brahmanical Sanskrit Epics”, 276.
20 R. Thapar, “The Purāṇas: Heresy and the Vaṃśānucarita”, 28–49.
21 Life of the Buddha and the Early History of the Order.
Buddhist Biographies 449
Vṛjjis. The campaign of Magadha against the Vṛjjis is described,
as also various conspiracies among the kingdoms. The Buddha is
honoured as a cakravartin on his death. The Saṅgha declines with
the passing away of the leading disciples, although this is sought
to be corrected by the monk Kāśyapa. The founding of another
sect that settled in Kashmir is narrated, paralleling those described
for Sri Lanka and Gandhāra. The account continues with schisms
and sects. It is also said that 137 years after the death of the Bud-
dha the rulers of Magadha, Nanda and Mahāpadma, convened an
assembly to discuss problems facing the doctrine.22 Although the
Council of Pāṭaliputra is not mentioned, a schism in the reign of
Dhammasoka, 160 years after the death of the Buddha, is referred
to. This chronology differs from that of the Ceylon Chronicles, but
the mahāparinirvāṇa again predates the Nanda dynasty.
The biographies in general have certain common features. The
earlier genealogies have no regnal years but are similar in style
to the descent lists of the the Purāṇas. The Śākyas mark a turn-
ing point, as the societies where the Buddha preaches are already
mutating into kingship and a state system.23 The emphasis on the
conversion of kings and their participation in the affairs of the
Saṅgha, such as calling the Councils, marks the difference. It is
significant that the clans of the Vṛjji confederacy play a lesser
role in this activity, although in the Canon the Buddha states that
the Saṅgha should function in a manner similar to that of the
assemblies of the clans.
3. The Mahāvastu and the Lalitavistara
The translation into Chinese of many stories on the life of the
Buddha appears under a generic title in the early centuries ad.24
22 These dates allow little time between the Councils and do not refer to
the reigns of Candragupta and Bindusāra that are mentioned in the Pāli Chro-
nicles.
23 R. Thapar, From Lineage to State, 147–8.
24 Fo-pen-hsing-chi-ching, viff. Confucian and Taoist influences on Chinese
translations of Buddhist texts have been noticed: H. Nakamura, “The Influence
of Confucian Ethics on the Chinese Translation of Buddhist Sutras”, 156–70;
E. Lamotte, History of Indian Buddhism, 177, 654–5.
450 The Past Before Us
The Abhiniṣkramaṇa Sūtra, taken to China, relates the accepted
narrative of the Buddha’s life, but with a few changes in name
and minor activities. The author was said to have been a Buddhist
monk from Gandhāra who realized the necessity of a biography in
his mission to China in order to acquaint the new converts with the
life and teaching of the Buddha. This was obviously an easier way
to start than to plunge into the Canon. It might explain in part the
many biographies in the Northern Tradition. The colophon of the
text claims that the stories of the Buddha’s biography had various
titles in India and lists these as the Mahāvastu and the Lalita -
vistara, among others.
The rājavaṃśa (succession of rulers) begins in remote times
and traces many generations of cakravartins and ultimately
describes the rise of the Ikṣvāku lineage to which the Śākyas be-
longed. The earlier ancestral figure is called Sammata. The smaller
cakravartins are associated with establishing various cities. The
origin of the Śākya clan carries the usual symbolism of parents
in exile. Political power and its relations with the Buddha are
deliberately brought in when we are told that the king of Magadha,
Bimbisāra, anxious that he should be the most powerful ruler, was
put out when he heard the prophecy that the Buddha would be a
world conqueror. However, when the Buddha comes to the capital
to preach, Bimbisāra states that the boon he wanted was that he
be taught by the Buddha. Once again political power is humbled
before the Buddha. Since these texts were about the Buddha and
not the history of the local Saṅgha, political power was predictably
subordinate. The attempt is to include history and chronology in
the biography.
The Mahāvastu of the Mahāsaṅghika sect is dated to about the
third century ad.25 Although in essence a compendium of legends
about the Buddha, it is nevertheless seen as a popular biography of
a historical person. The present text incorporates earlier material
and is composed partly in Hybrid Sanskrit and partly in Prākrit.26
Some legends are evocative of the Pāli Vinaya, others draw on
25 Mahāvastu, ed. E. Senart, 3 vols; The Mahāvastu, trans. J.J. Jones.
26 Mahāvastu, trans. J.J. Jones, vol. I, x–xiff; B.C. Law, A Study of the Mahā-
vastu.
Buddhist Biographies 451
the Nidāna-kathā, and some parallel parts of the Divyāvadāna,
although their sectarian origins differ. The genealogies of kṣatriyas
start with an account of creation, followed by the lineages, focus
on the descent of the Śākyas.
The biography is based on the Nidāna-kathā, but its style is
more ornate and the story is replete with miracles. It begins with
narratives of the previous Buddhas, followed by those about
Gautama Buddha. The rājavaṃśa (succession of rulers) relates the
genesis of the world and repeats in effect the story of the Mahā -
sammata as given in the Canon.27 The Śākyas are traced back to
Ikṣvāku, who in turn is traced to the Mahāsammata, and not to
Manu as in the Purāṇas. The rājavaṃsa elaborates on the account
of creation and the initial state of bliss as given in the Dīgha-
nikāya.28 The Mahāsammata when selected and authorized to
rule was compensated with a wage of one-sixth of the produce
(saḍbhāga), now a regular tax collected by the king. Because he
was deserving of this he was a rājā, and as a kṣatriya he had to
protect the people. The election is a concession to his sovereignty.
Subsequent to this came the genealogy of the successor kings.
The origin of the Śākyas and the Koliyas, is in essentials the
same story as the earlier one. The young Koliya men have to be
trained to the ways of the Śākyas, thus pointing to the superiority
of the latter. The Koliyas owe their importance to the Buddha’s
mother, being of their clan. The life of the Buddha covers his
birth, renunciation, enlightenment, teaching, disciples, the multiple
conversions of various categories of people to his doctrine, and
his eventual passing away. Interspersed with this are a large num-
ber of stories in the style of the Jātakas, each with a moral or a
reference to an earlier incarnation of the Buddha as a human or
an animal or bird.
Two strands are intertwined. One is Gautama working his
way towards appearing on earth as a Buddha, for which he had
to prepare himself through almost infinite time. The other is the
usual concern that his status on earth derives from the authority
of being born in an appropriate lineage. Both strands have been
27 Dīgha-nikāya, 3.84ff.; Mahāvastu, I.338–48.
28 Mahāvastu, I.338–52ff.
452 The Past Before Us
teased out at some length. The narrative incorporates three themes.
The first is that of the origins of society and rulership, which is the
antecedent for the actions of the Buddha; yet, occasionally, it has
the imprint of times later than that of the Pāli Canon. The second is
the ancestry of the Buddha being traced back to the Mahāsammata
and not to Ikṣvāku. The Buddha is a kṣatriya and has the right to
claim authority over society, which authority he prefers to claim
not as a king but as a renunciate. The Śākya genealogy underlines
the correct status of the authority. Having established his antece-
dents and the general formulations supporting his mission, the
third section highlights his life and activities.
The Buddha’s correlation with political authority is stated more
directly in the conversion of Bimbisāra. Whereas in the Pāli texts
Bimbisāra is said to have met the Buddha and perhaps even tried to
dissuade him from renunciation, here the relationship is reversed
and Bimbisāra is said not only to be anxious to meet the Buddha,
but on meeting him is converted.29 Bimbisāra is also anxious for
the approval of the Buddha. When he visits the Buddha he is ac-
companied not only by his court, all in their richest array, but also
by the townsmen, guild members, merchants, and professionals,
almost as if the approval was the validation of his being king. The
doctrine becomes more important than the historical significance
of the conversion of Bimbisāra; although by implication it is
suggested that the conversion was not just of the king but of all
his subjects as well.
The life of the Buddha is also narrated in the Lalitavistara, start-
ing with his descent from the Tuṣita heaven, and the complexities
of choosing his family are discussed.30 The sequence of events
is again based on the Nidāna-kathā. The heavy emphasis on his
divinity and miraculous birth is a change from the Pāli Canon and
reflects the sectarian bias of the author.
Buddhas are not born in low-caste families, such as those of
the caṇḍāla or pukkusa. Only brāhmaṇa and kṣatriya families
are appropriate, and the choice between these would depend on
which was the more respected status at the time. The choice of
Śuddhodana and the Śākyas is determined by their pure descent as
29 Mahāvastu, 3.437; Mahāvagga, 1.22.
30 Lalitavistara, ed. S. Lefmann; Lalitavistara, ed. R. Mitra.
Buddhist Biographies 453
well as their many virtues. Mention is made of various kingdoms
that were powerful, with royal families that could qualify to be
associated with the Buddha’s birth—Magadha, Kosala, Kauśāmbī,
Avanti, Mathura, Mithila, Hastināpura under the Pāṇḍavas, and
Vaiśāli as the centre of the Vṛjji confederacy, a reasonably accurate
list from a perspective of half a millennium later. All these are
dismissed as having blemishes of various kinds. They were ruled
either by illegitimate kings, such as the Pāṇḍavas who claimed to
be sons of gods, or others who were of impure descent, or who
were tyrants. Sixteen kingdoms are referred to and this number
could be from the Pāli Canon. This was a reference to a history
of five centuries ago as they no longer existed as independent
states.
The writing of these biographies was a counterpart to changes
in the doctrine of Mahāyāna Buddhism. Whereas it was claimed
that their texts had incorporated the words of the Buddha, at the
same time the historical Buddha began to be less insistently etched.
The Buddha was projected as the embodiment of dharma and some
even argued against his nirvāṇa, maintaining that he was virtually
immortal. Biographies were sliding into hagiography.
4. The Divyāvadāna
A different kind of composition narrating biographical epi -
sodes seeks to recall the activities of a past king and patron of
the Saṅgha—the emperor Aśoka. The possibility of a Sanskrit
Buddhist text veering towards a historical tradition lay in sections
of the Divyāvadāna.31 These sections—biographical vignettes of
Aśoka Maurya, his son Kunāla, and younger brother Vīṭāśoka—
are the Aśokāvadāna, the Kunalāvadāna, and the Vītāśokāvadāna.
Also included was the early material from the Avadāna-śataka, a
collection of stories that link past lives with the present through
rebirth.32 The borrowings are mainly from non-Canonical texts
but also with some later parts of the Canon. The literary style
31 Divyāvadāna, ed. E.B. Cowell and R.A. Neill; Divyāvadāna, ed. P.L.Vaidya,
chs 29, 27, 28 / C. 348–434. The avadāna narrates a person’s religious deeds
illustrating his devotion and the working of his karma.
32 M. Winternitz, History of Indian Literature, vol. II, 279ff.; G.M. Bongard-
Levin, “The Historicity of the Ancient Indian Avadānas”, 123–51.
454 The Past Before Us
mixes simple Sanskrit prose with ornate Sanskrit poetry. The final
composition is of about the third century ad but drew on earlier
compositions, oral and written.
The Aśokāvadāna is one of the oldest sections of the larger text
and is believed to have had as its nucleus the Aśokarājā-sūtra, a
biography of the emperor Aśoka first composed at Pāṭaliputra.33
This then had many versions—the Aśoka-sūtra at Kauśāmbī, the
Aśokāvadāna at Mathura, the Avadānakalpalatā in Kashmir, and
the Ayu-wang-zhuan in Chinese. There are also later references
in Tibetan and Sanskrit.34 It is thought that it was possibly first
recorded as a versified oral tradition in Magadha. The Sanskrit
prose form probably took shape in Mathura, where the Buddhist
moralistic dialectic may have been introduced into simple stories
about the king. By the time it reached Kashmir it had doubtless
taken on the sanctity of an ancient tradition. The geographical
movement was from Pāṭaliputra via Kauśāmbī and Mathura to
Kashmir and Gandhāra.
The Aśokāvadāna is believed to have been composed by a monk
of the Mathura region. It chronicles segments of the Mauryan
dynasty, focusing on the Aśokan legends and of his son Kunāla,
into which is woven the history of the Elders of the Buddhist
Saṅgha in northern India from the time of the Buddha. Although
the perspective of the Councils and the succession of teachers is
assumed, the intertwining of the Saṅgha with political author-
ity while being present is not so evident as, for example, in the
Mahāvaṃsa. The focus here is on Aśoka as the ideal king from a
Buddhist perspective and therefore amenable to the Saṅgha. So
successful was his projection as a cakravartin responding to the
Saṅgha and the dharma that the sixth-century Chinese emperor
Liang Wudi modelled himself on the Aśoka of the avadānas,
as did the empress Wu Zetian in the seventh century.35 Closer
home there were attempts to fit Kaniṣka, the Kuṣāṇa ruler, into
the mould of Aśoka, with fragmentary references to his building
stūpas and calling a Council in Kashmir to clarify the doctrine.36
33 J. Przyluski, La Legende de l’Empereur Asoka, 66–7, 100ff.
34 See also J. Brarvig and F. Liland, Traces of Gandharan Buddhism, 59ff.
35 M. Deeg, “From the Iron-wheel to Bodhisattvahood: Aśoka in Buddhist
Culture and Memory”, 109–44.
36 J.M. Rosenfield, The Dynastic Arts of the Kushans, 31ff.
Buddhist Biographies 455
But the narratives remained a collection of episodes rather than
a connected history—as in the Ceylon Chronicles.
This is of course a striking contrast also to the brahmanical
tradition, where Aśoka is ignored and the title devānaṃpiya be-
comes virtually a term of contempt. In the Northern Buddhist
tradition Aśoka is said to have convened a Council attended by
hundreds of monks and presided over by Yaśas, interestingly not
Moggaliputta Tissa.37 Themes significant to its deliberations were
the determining of the doctrine, the recording of the succession of
the Elders, and the link with political authority underlying royal
patronage. The locally powerful sect legitimized itself through
claiming these connections. That decisions may not have been ac-
curately recorded or that the lists of succession were contradictory
at some points did not matter. They were referred to and linked to
political history for an authoritative endorsement. The tradition of
holding a Fourth Council in Kashmir was in part an endorsement
of Buddhism arriving in new territory, and an assertion of defining
the doctrine independent of the Theravāda.
The treatment of the Mauryan dynasty is from the perspective
of the Saṅgha. Legends abound, some similar to the southern tradi-
tion and some not. In a previous birth Aśoka as a child is said to
have placed a handful of earth in the Buddha’s begging bowl and
asked to be a ruler of the earth.38 This has been compared with
the southern tradition, in which he gives a bowlful of honey as
alms.39 His karma acts as a causal factor. People do not eat the
earth, but this echoes the Buddhist story of genesis in which they
did once eat the earth—in an age when there were no kings. Is
this therefore an annulling of the present and an assumption that
kingless times were better? In the telling of this story it is signi-
ficant that the Buddha alone can convert the bowlful of earth into
a kingdom and grant the child’s wish.
In the Aśokāvadāna, Aśoka is described as the son of Bindu -
sāra and a brāhmaṇa woman from Campā in the east.40 In his
youth Aśoka is said to have subdued the region of Taxila in the
37 K. Upreti, India as Reflected in the Divyāvadāna, 114ff.
38 J. Strong, The Legend of King Aśoka, 63, 287, 292.
39 P. Mus, Barabudur: Esquisse d’une Histoire du Bouddhisme fondee sur la
Critique Archaeologique des texts, vol. II, 289.
40 J. Przyluski, La Legende de l’Empereur Asoka, 106ff.
456 The Past Before Us
north-west and the Khasa peoples in the mountains. The start of his
administrative career was in Taxila, rather than in Ujjain, as stated
in the Mahāvaṃsa. Many of the episodes of his earlier life are set
in Taxila, as is the central episode in the life of his son, Kunāla.
The geography changes from Vidiśā to Taxila with the change of
sect and the location. Aśoka undergoes the usual transformation
from wicked to righteous ruler. Another story, also in the Ceylon
Chronicles, narrates his visit to all the places sacred to Buddhism.
The pilgrimage is linked to the overnight construction of 84,000
stūpas to receive the relics of the Buddha. This sets out a sacred
geography of the spread of Buddhism, apart from indicating what
was thought to be the area of Aśoka’s control.
The story of Aśoka making the young and attractive Tiṣyarakṣitā
his Chief Queen, which brought about his unhappiness, is told
in the Pāli Chronicles and also narrated here. She is accused of
trying to destroy the bodhi-tree, feeling that it had priority over
her in Aśoka’s attention. She orders the blinding of Kunāla, her
stepson, who rejected her advances. This episode links Kunāla to
the Northern tradition, and possibly that is why it is not included
in the Ceylon Chronicles. On being told of the blinding of Kunāla,
his father Aśoka is inconsolable and orders that Tiṣyarakṣitā be
put to death. The story has the popular stereotypes of stepmothers
and an ageing man unable to control a young wife who eventually
causes him sorrow.
In another story Aśoka, as an expression of faith, donates his
realm to the Saṅgha. The ministers request his grandson to inter-
vene, which he does: he buys back the realm with large sums from
the treasury. In similar vein we are told that Aśoka, towards the
end of his life, was unable to make donations to the Saṅgha as
he had given everything away.41 When a monk comes asking for
alms, all that Aśoka can give him is half an āmalaka, a myrobalan
fruit. This is reminiscent of the Vessantara Jātaka.
The composition of the Aśokāvadāna coincided with the
41 Aśokāvadāna, ch. 29, C. 431; J. Przyluski, La Legende de l’Empereur Asoka,
296. Curiously there are no inscriptions recording donations from Aśoka to the
Buddhist Saṅgha. There is one inscription requiring that the donations of his
queen be recorded, but the recipients are not mentioned.
Buddhist Biographies 457
period of the transition of Buddhism from a local sect to a well-
established and widely-spread religion. From a following in the
Ganges plain and Central India, Northern Buddhism expanded into
north-western India and Central and East Asia. A tradition had
therefore to be created to preserve salient events in the history of
the religion, hence the narrative of the Councils and the Elders. If
these events could be linked to powerful political personalities, the
tradition would be taken more seriously and would receive added
patronage. So the Mauryas, and particularly Aśoka, came in very
handy. The Mauryas were known to be patrons of the “heterodox”
sects, what with the Jainas claiming Candragupta and Samprati,
the Ājīvikas claiming Bindusāra and Daśaratha, and Aśoka who
was a Buddhist. In the Northern tradition Aśoka is projected not
just as an imperial patron but also as being near-subservient to
the Saṅgha. This is a different treatment from that of the Pāli
Chronicles, where he is more assertive in giving direction to the
doctrine. Neither of these depictions is endorsed in the Aśoka of
his own edicts.
It is striking but perhaps not surprising that the Buddhist tradi-
tion tends to ignore Aśoka’s definition of the dhamma, where the
emphasis is on social ethics and the need for the coexistence of
all sects in the interests of social harmony—the statements that
he makes in his Major Rock Edicts and Pillar Edicts. In those few
edicts where he addresses the Saṅgha, his concern is with pro -
tecting the teachings, to the extent that he orders the expulsion
of dissident monks and nuns. But as a contrast, in his edicts to
his subjects his constant plea is that all sects—pāsaṃḍas—of
whatever persuasion are to be given equal respect. Brāhmaṇas
and śramaṇas are both to be honoured. This is foundational to his
definition of dhamma and stems from his function as a statesman
and emperor. What he addresses to the Saṅgha are more in the
nature of directives, and in no way do they sugest his subordina-
tion to the Saṅgha. The Buddhist tradition therefore presents him
in a different light from his own edicts. This historiographical
representation partially explains why modern historians, barring
a few, have also projected him as a Buddhist ruler essentially con-
cerned with the propagation of Buddhism, rather than exploring
his particular definition and use of the concept of dhamma.
458 The Past Before Us
Buddhism was spreading into new areas both in the North and
in the South. The Śakas, Yavanas, and Kuṣāṇas arrived as a result
of invasions, migrations, and commercial activities and settled
in the north-west. Those among them who showed an interest
in Buddhism, as many of the new elite did, required a history of
the Buddhist tradition, as also biographies of the exemplars of
the dhamma-rājās, such as Aśoka. The processes of assimila-
tion, incorporation, and co-option were now fairly common both
among the ruling groups and those whom they ruled. Buddhism,
not being a rigidly ecclesiastical religion, lent itself to inducting
local flavours. The tradition could also be used to strengthen the
faithful against what was viewed as the persecution of Buddhism
by the Śuṅga dynasty further east, and some hostility from local
rulers.42
Various religious groups—such as Buddhist sects, Vaiṣṇava
Bhāgavata cults which focused on Viṣṇu and his incarnations,
and some Śaiva cults—attracted the attention of the new arriv als,
ruling families, and others. It was easier to accommodate the
latter within these religions than among the orthodox beliefs and
practices of Brahmanism. As a concession to local sensitivity, it
was maintained that the Buddha had actually visited Mathura and
Kashmir and predicted the coming of Buddhism to these lands,
an idea which is the mirror image of the Buddha having visited
Sri Lanka. In the earlier tradition the Buddha was accompanied
by his disciple Ānanda; in the later tradition, the Thera Upagupta
accompanies Aśoka.43 The insistence on the earlier visits of the
Buddha would also have helped to create a sense of community,
vital to the functioning of the Saṅgha, and confirmed by the claim
to a common history.
The Mauryan dynasty, and especially Aśoka, is made to play
a particularly important role in the history of the Saṅgha and the
succession of the Elders. The list of Elders is not identical in the
northern and southern traditions, but this is of less consequence.
What matters is the listing of succession and the chronological
42 Aśokāvadāna, ch. 29, C. 434, in the Divyāvadāna; J. Przyluski, La Legende
de l’Empereur Asoka, 162.
43 J. Przyluski, La Legende de l’Empereur Asoka, 3–5ff.
Buddhist Biographies 459
parallel with the rulers. Fictitious genealogies of teachers, for
example, are known from as early as the Upaniṣads, where the
actuality is less significant than the notion of legitimate succes-
sion. What matters is the acceptance of even a marginally accurate
succession.
The Northern tradition is addressed to both monks and lay
followers. The biographies of the Elders are used to instruct the
monks, and the texts are aimed at exalting the monasteries and the
associated teachings. This was necessary where sects competed,
not only for royal patronage, but also for patronage from highly
placed officials, rich merchants, and traders on the routes from the
Ganges valley to north-western India, and beyond to Central and
West Asia. These trading activities also introduced ideas prevalent
in one area to another. An awareness of Greco-Bactrian, Zoroas-
trian, and Manichaean religion and practices become pertinent to
the Northern Buddhist tradition, as for example in the delineation
of the Buddha Maitreya. The concentration in the north-west may
also be explained by the claim that Puṣyamitra Śuṅga was hostile
to Buddhist establishments in the middle Ganges plain,44 and is
accused of massacring many monks at Sāketa and other monas-
teries, stopping only because of popular opposition. The Thera
Yaśas escaped miraculously and continued his work elsewhere.
But even apart from this, some sections of the doctrine took new
forms through the imprint of local beliefs, a process that was not
specific to time and place.
The notion of prophecy, common to the Puranic tradition as
well, led to the prediction that, a hundred years after the death
of the Buddha, Aśoka would rule and propagate the Buddhist
dhamma.45 The event had already happened, therefore prediction
was a ploy to enhance the claim of the texts. Persecution seems
to have encouraged the prediction of Buddhism disappearing a
thousand years after the death of the Buddha, attributed to the
Buddha in some recensions of the Aśokāvadāna. However, it is
44 Aśokāvadāna, ch. 29, C. 434, in the Divyāvadāna; J. Przyluski, La Legende
de l’Empereur Asoka, 99.
45 In the Ceylon Chronicles, Aśoka is said to come to the throne 218 years
after the mahāparinirvāṇa.
460 The Past Before Us
said that there will be a gradual return to the Dharma, which in its
final phase will witness the coming of Maitreya. This millenarian
aspect reverses the disappearance of the religion.
The Aśokāvadāna carries some ideas on the notion of the
cakra vartin. Aśoka is the caturbhāga-cakravartin and the bala-
cakravartin, the universal monarch who rules the four continents
and is willing to use force (bala) if necessary. Was this a conces-
sion to the underlying fear of kingship and the possibility of the
king using force?46 This is later expanded into a theory of four
categories of cakravartins: the one with the golden wheel rules
four continents, the one with the silver rules three, the one with
the copper rules two, and he with the iron wheel rules a single
continent—the home continent of Jambudvīpa. The scheme has
a corresponding change from rule through persuasion to rule
through force, although force is subservient to dharma.47 Not only
does Aśoka remain the epitome of the royal patron, little attempt
is made to give the same publicity to other patrons. This is a com-
ment on how the history of the Saṅgha was viewed and a contrast
to the Pāli Chronicle.
It is curious that, given the number of Aśokan edicts in north-
western India in Prākrit, Greek, and Aramaic—all languages
with scripts in use—these inscriptions are not referred to. Were
they, however, read as sources for information on events such
as pilgrimages (dhammayāttā), visiting the bodhi-tree (ayāya
saṃbodhi), or even the reference to displaying relics? This would
have confirmed the depiction of Aśoka as a universal monarch,
the righteous king of righteousness—rājā cakkavatti dhammiko-
dhammarājā.
The succession of Elders is an example of sectarian needs cre -
ating a history. The Majjhima-nikāya states that there was to
be no head of the Saṅgha. Yet the succession lists are carefully
maintained by each sect, even to the extent of preserving a variant
list where there are small differences. Thus, the Pāli Chroni-
cles preserve a list which is different from that of the Northern
46 H. Kern and B. Nanjio (ed.), Saddharmapuṇḍarīka Sūtra, 6, 20, 263, quoted
in J. Strong, The Legend of King Aśoka, 54–6.
47 J. Strong, The Legend of King Aśoka, 55.
Buddhist Biographies 461
tradition. The list of teachers represents those in authority in the
Saṅgha of a particular region, and correlates the chronology of
change in the doctrine by links with particular Elders, assuming
that the Elders were present.
Biographies become far less prominent after the mid-first mil-
lennium ad, when the decline of Buddhism begins to be noticed in
the subcontinent, the degree varying from region to region. The
religion was being shaped by internal dissensions, the assimilation
of local cults, and the continuity of the urban economy and culture
on which it was largely dependent. The area where it remained
important was eastern India, probably because of the trade with
South East Asia, which kept the financial networks in a healthy
condition, and where the patronage from royalty and merchants
was forthcoming. Eastern Indian Buddhism had close connections
with Tibet and Buddhism there. Texts on Tibetan Buddhism in-
cluded sections on the biography of the Buddha.
5. Buddhist Historical Traditions
As a contrast to Sri Lanka, Buddhist texts from Gandhāra are
not presented in a systematically historical manner. Despite
the region having hosted monasteries, the relative absence of
chronicles is striking. One reason may have been that it was an
area where people were frequently reshuffled through migrations
and invasions, with the continuity of politico-religious relations
being broken. Being at the crossroads of trade, substantial wealth
was generated, but it was dispersed over distant places. Patronage
came from the gahapati and the seṭṭhi (the householder and the
merchant), the spectacular patronage from royalty being some-
what less forthcoming. Northern Buddhism was into intensive
proselytizing in Central Asia and further into China, competing
with Manichaeanism, Zoroastrianism, and Nestorian Christianity
for a start. Closer home, the popularity of Puranic Hinduism was
increasing with the worship of Śiva and the avatāras of Viṣṇu.
Puranic deities were open to mutation into syncretic cults. Buddh-
ism was therefore anxious to attribute miraculous powers to the
Buddha. In Sri Lanka the mission is presented as immediately
successful and the status it attained was reinforced by linking the
462 The Past Before Us
Saṅgha to a royal patron, who in turn was a patron to the Sihala
royalty. The monasteries of Kashmir and Gandhāra did not main-
tain records parallel to those of Sri Lanka, nor is the Kuṣāṇa king
Kaniṣka projected as a latter-day Aśoka.
The dynasties that ruled were generally not of local families and
traced themselves back to distant places. The patronage of the two
dominant powers, the Kuṣāṇas and the Sassanians, was not exclu-
sively to the Saṅgha, for many other religions sought and received
patronage. The Buddhism of the north-west also had to contend
with an array of deities and semi-divine beings, some of whom
coloured its self-perceptions—and of its role in the region. There
was no gnawing rivalry for patronage with dissenting Buddhist
sects, an absence that would have reduced the urgency of keeping
records and maintaining a history. The reciprocal closeness of the
Saṅgha to political authority, as in Sri Lanka, or for that matter
later in Tibet and Ladakh, all of which maintained chronicles, was
not apparent in the north-west. The monastery in Sri Lanka did
go into decline but only in competition with another monastery,
and finally revived.
The biographical form was effective in areas new to conversion.
Life stories can be enriched with myth and fantasy more easily
then chronicles, even if the latter are not free of such enrichment.
Using the carita form was an indirect way of suggesting histo-
ricity, not so much of the Buddha which was established, but of
events related to the Saṅgha. The focus is on the Buddha and the
long line of preceding ones becomes an attempt to give antiquity
and legitimacy to the teaching. The biographical form isolated
the individual and could place him in a different context from his
original one. Written 500 years after the Buddha, and depicting
the Śākya oligarchy in the form of a contemporary kingdom, the
earlier form would have been better observed had the Nikāyas
been read from a historical perspective.
Buddhist historical perspectives reveal a variety of character-
istic features. Although the Buddha emphasized the need to be
sure of the reliability of the information that is quoted in terms
of its coming from impeccable sources, nevertheless events could
be over-dramatized to make a point, as in the description of the
activities of Aśoka in relation to the Saṅgha. The Mahāvaṃsa sets
Buddhist Biographies 463
him in the context of events and politics of the Mauryan period.
He is significant not only for his patronage of Buddhism but also
for the claim that his son preached the message of the Buddha
in Sri Lanka, making it the formal religion in the island. In the
northern tradition his other son, Kunāla, does not play this role.
Only after he is blinded does he turn to Buddhist teaching, and
there is no conversion of others. The Mahāvaṃsa depicts Aśoka
as part of a historical unfolding of events concerning the past of
Buddhism, and indirectly of the monastery of the Mahāvihāra;
in the Aśokāvadāna the focus is on the activities of Aśoka as a
Buddhist king, but not linked to any specific monastery.
Interests have to be subordinated to the welfare of the Saṅgha
and its primacy. However, the Saṅgha is not above criticism.
Although this is put forward in a mild manner—except where it
relates to a rival sect when it can be vituperative—there is the
awareness that even the Saṅgha can make mistakes. Most texts
are polemics of their own sect against others regarded almost
as heresies. Historicity becomes essential to religions such as
Buddhism and Jainism because of their strong sectarian loyalties.
Debates on these teachings and their elaboration give direction to
the evolution of the sects. The institutionalization of the sects as
monastic centres also needed to be recorded. Historicity is under-
lined by linking this history with known persons from the past.
To prove the historicity of the Buddha himself, his life had to be
fitted into a historical chronology with an established context, as
indeed also the narrative of expanding Buddhism and its various
missions. This was done by linking both to historical persons, even
when the nature of the link was uncertain. Material from the oral
tradition where the itihāsa-purāṇa tradition provided names and
narratives of the kṣatriya ancestors was included.
The Buddha’s death becomes the pivot of a chronological syst em,
which again suggests a historical possibility, particularly where
chronological disparities are not too great. Sectarian conflicts
were carefully recorded. Groups in opposition, although claim-
ing to derive their views from the same doctrine, have to explain,
where possible, their differences. The writing of explanatory com-
mentaries at frequent intervals acted as a further means of both
preserving the record, adding new material, and reformulating
464 The Past Before Us
the narrative in accordance with current perspectives. It also
encouraged some reflection on the past, as in the commentaries
of Buddhaghosa.
The Buddha stated that as long as the monastery followed the
same procedures as the gaṇa-saṅghas there would be no divisive
tendencies. However, the gaṇa-saṅghas in the post-Canonical
texts are societies of the past and the attempt was to present
the Buddha in a contemporary setting, even though alluding to
the past. The first schism conceded by the Saṅgha happened at
the Council at Vaiśāli, with the monks of the Vṛjji gaṇa-saṅgha
demanding changes in monastic practices. Given the free range of
ideas associated with the period of the Buddha, it would not have
been surprising that dissidence would be common in any order of
śramaṇas. Subsequent to this the patronage is almost exclusive-
ly from kingdoms. Kings such as Bimbisāra and Pasenadi are
depicted in conversation with the Buddha.
The concern with the politics of the kṣatriyas is different from
the Purāṇas. For all its philosophical heterodoxy, the Buddhist
tradition focuses more on kingship, and on the power and moral
authority of the ideal king visualized as the dharmarājā and the
cakkavatti, and in approving of the king as patron of the Saṅgha,
resulting in a complex interplay between the Saṅgha and the king.
The Saṅgha was a community of renunciants and therefore outside
the jurisdiction of state and society; nevertheless, it had to maintain
some equation with the state. The claim to royal patronage was
also a claim to state protection, as indeed a claim to status, all of
which is knitted into the pattern of its historical tradition.
Patronage of a substantial kind also came from the gahapati
(householder) and the seṭṭhi (trader). There was a consciousness of
breaking away from orthodox belief and practice in the opposition
to sacrificial ritual, and this meant altering ritual and the inten-
tion of religion. In areas where Buddhism prevailed, the earlier
sacrificial rituals and prestations were gradually replaced by the
institution of the Saṅgha which required dāna (gift-giving) to the
Saṅgha and alms to bhikkhus. In this both royal patronage on a
grand scale, as well as the routine patronage of daily alms rounds
made a significant difference.
Buddhist Biographies 465
The Saṅgha required patronage from the community to main-
tain monasteries. Initially, a gift from a wealthy merchant or a rājā
was sufficient. But when the Saṅgha grew to be a powerful institu-
tion the patronage had to be greater and required the largesse of
kings. The transition to association with royalty, as demonstrated
in the Chronicles, was not unexpected. The narrative begins with
legends of heroes and the society associated with them, and the
legends give way to the presumed history of kings. From this
perspective the earliest society of indigenous forest-dwellers has
to be conquered or destroyed, since such people cannot support a
Saṅgha. Settlers, preferably cultivators, are necessary to provide
the required resources. It thus becomes the historical fate of all
those categorized as rākṣasas and yakkhas to be eventually over-
come by the people of the settlement, symbolized by Vijaya or
any other adventurer.
The authorship of the tradition was largely in the hands of
monks and was intended in the main for monks and lay follow-
ers—“to arouse the serene joy and emotion of the pious”, as the
Chronicle states. The discourse was among the converted but with
an eye on disabling those ideologies to which it was opposed. Even
if the authors were many, the purpose was single. Authentication
lay, among other things, in mentioning the sources consulted.
Notions of the remote past drew upon creation and origin myths,
some parallel to the Puranic tradition. There was a large fund
from which the themes and symbols were borrowed by many
groups with varying ideologies. The narratives were altered to
suit these ideologies.
At another level, the understanding of historical explanations
of the past was helped by the foundational thinking of the Bud-
dhist doctrine. The focus was on dependent origination—pratīta-
samutpāda—of all phenomena. This was the natural law of
causality which the Buddha recognized and used in explaining
his doctrine. Because it is a law of nature it does not even require
the presence of any supernatural being. The chain of cause and
effect through actions is also an explanation of the how and the
why of past events. Actions are presented in the context of ethi-
cal norms, and this is an underlying argument even if the writing
466 The Past Before Us
is formulaic. Change is expected given the impermanence that
prevails, but this is not discussed in relation to the past. There is
an awareness of the śāsana (doctrine) of the Saṅgha declining,
as predicted after 500 years. But a distinction is made between
śāsana and dharma where the latter will continue as long as there
are arhants. Whereas this reflects the downswing of the time-cycle,
it also carries the eschatology of the return of the utopia with the
coming of Maitreya.
Whether in chronicles or biographies, the balance between the
Saṅgha and political authority can be uneven. There are occasions
when the Saṅgha legitimizes the king, and others when the king
does not recognize the legitimacy of the Saṅgha. Those sympa-
thetic to Buddhism, such as Aśoka, are given a high social status,
a status denied them in the Purāṇas. A son of Aśoka is involved
with the spread of the doctrine in Sri Lanka. The Councils are
invariably associated with kings, largely for prestige, but also for
chronology, even if uncertain, and for an assertion of additional
authority. Royal patronage is not one-sided; the sectarian net-
work, being a beneficiary of patronage, provides an agency that
cultivates support for the king. Should the ideology be that of
fostering universality and cutting across social and other distinc-
tions, this would be additionally useful in governing a society of
diverse groups.
A new element introduced through Mahāyāna Buddhism was
the concept of the bodhisattva, not merely as a figure of the past
but one concerned with attaining perfection in the future. Perfec-
tion comes close to hinting at some elements of deity. The lives
of bodhisattvas, however formulaic, encouraged the idea of the
biographies of the Buddha and of the great patrons. The teaching
moves from an oral tradition to the literate, from hearing and
reciting to reading and writing. The updating of texts becomes an
important activity. Because the early texts are also preserved in
a written form from a certain point onwards, changes required a
new text. Thus, although the Dīpavaṃsa and the Mahāvaṃsa cover
much the same ground, the details and intentions can differ. The
audience was both monks and lay people, and those associated
with the royal court. Where the original text could not be changed
except marginally, changes were recorded in the commentaries,
Buddhist Biographies 467
including new versions of earlier themes. This had to do not only
with written texts being more closed, as against the openness of
most oral traditions, but with commentaries explaining the past.
These were signs of a literate society. Of the categories of texts
discussed, the chronicle form is essentially that of an institution
through which the history of Buddhism is related. It is therefore
partial to the institution. History, in this case, involves the initial
demarcation of territory through the visits of the Buddha to sanc-
tify the area. The Saṅgha requires its own authentication, hence
the history of the Councils and the succession of Elders and of
missions and the interface with kings. Pre-Buddhist populations
have to be kept separate and are dismissed as primitive. The arrival
of the mission is therefore a time-marker and the history of the
region changes. The establishment of the doctrine entails acquir-
ing property and involves records of buildings and structures. The
Saṅgha was the fixed point of the community of monks, nuns, and
lay-followers: bhikkhus, bhikkhunīs, upāsakas, and upāsikās. The
history of the Saṅgha claimed to be the history of this community.
This was a departure from other contemporary forms of recording,
reciting, and writing the past.
Biographies emerge as a new genre, reiterating the fact that the
founder of Buddhism was a historical figure and biography evokes
history. The biography links up with origin myths and genealogies,
which are incorporated, and sometimes modified or embellished.
What is new is the focus on the individual, not altogether unex-
pected in an ideology where liberation from rebirth focuses on the
actions of the individual. Both categories of texts are central to
creating the identity of a community, and the identity draws from
the way in which its history is presented, even if the medium is
the chronicle of the monastery or the biography of the Buddha.
In some ways, the period around the sixth century ad is a turn-
ing point. In Sri Lanka it sees the revival of the authority of the
Mahāvihāra monastery, in Gandhāra it prepares itself for the
challenge from other religions—which ultimately it loses for a
variety of reasons. In the context of northern India and of histori-
cal traditions, there were to be new genres, some responding to
the Buddhist traditions.
Biographies of the Buddha tended to become hagiographical.
468 The Past Before Us
But the genre as a form of historical writing came to be adopted
by royal courts wishing to provide majesty and legitimacy to the
ruler, and to make virtually official statements about matters that
may have been in doubt. These biographies, known as caritas,
knitted together kāvya and facets of itihāsa. Although similar in
intent, they were different in content from those of the Buddha.
PART V
The Historical Tradition
Externalized

12
Historical Biographies
The Harṣacarita and the Rāmacarita
1. Biography and History
Biography, in order to be considered part of a historical tra-
dition, has to show awareness of that tradition even while
narrating events in the life of a person. He may be both
witnessing and recording events. He selects the events that he re -
gards as worthy of transmission to a contemporary audience and
to posterity. What permits such biography to be included as an
articulation of historical consciousness is not merely that several
such works relate to the activities of those in authority, but that the
structure within which the biography is composed hinges on the
historical tradition which is used to legitimize the subject.1 The
biographer is a committed witness. He chooses the actions of a
particular person, indicates their cause and purpose, and locates
them at a point in time and space. When it is the biography of a
contemporary, the biographer and his patron choose what they
want transmitted. The biographical span is linear.
Both genealogies and epic narratives provide commencement to
the idea of biography. It could be argued that the Mahābhārata is
a compilation of biographical fragments written by a grandfather
on his sons and grandsons! The historical biography differs from
1 A. Momigliano, “History and Biography”, 153–84; idem, The Development
of Greek Biography.
472 The Past Before Us
the epic in that its subject is historically known and not merely
presumed to have existed and has an element of historicity. When
the past is necessary to the present, it can be appropriated—as
in genealogies and brief histories of the dynasty. Fantasy may be
permitted in both epic and biography, but the degree of fantasy has
perforce to be controlled in the latter. Biography finds expression
in literature in the form of the carita, and occasionally also in sum-
mary form in inscriptions, both of which are relatively new genres
but significant as later versions of the itihāsa-purāṇa tradition.
The carita as a kāvya has a literary form with an aesthetic
appeal and differs in content from the kāvya as its intention is
to attempt an authentic portrayal of the subject as viewed by the
biographer, who also has a historical purpose in writing it. How-
ever, these texts were not intended as critical historical writing,
but as literature, except that they related to the exercise of power
and claimed that they were delineating events from the past and
the present as they actually happened.
The prominence of the royal biography marks a change from
the succession of lineages to that of kings, a shift from the impor-
tance of the collective lineage to the individual. The biography by
a contemporary, a known person with appropriate credentials, is
in essentials largely authentic, else it would be criticized as false.
As a document it is recording the present but with the knowledge
that it will be read in the future.
This new genre differs from earlier ones. The author is unam-
biguously identified, and his credentials have to be of the best so
that his claim to authenticity can be sustained. The autobiographi-
cal section explains who the author is and his qualification to write
the biography, as also implicitly why it had to be written. Some
bias is to be expected since the biographer is writing on his patron.
The narrative need not cover the life-span of the subject, but focus
on crucial events. When these have been satisfactorily narrated
and the intention achieved, the biography can close. These are not
birth-to-death life histories.
In interweaving the biographical with the historical, the time
period of the events can be short but the context is a longer histori-
cal time-span. When biographical writing becomes more common
towards the end of the first millennium ad, the earlier biographies
Historical Biographies 473
are treated as precedents. In some narratives memory is important,
both personal and public, and the author attempts to capture it.
The various contexts of the biographies were similar. The
author was either a court poet or a senior official, and of an upper
caste. The audience was the royal court and those constituting the
literate elite formally educated in Sanskrit. The patron was the
king, who was also the subject of the biography—and to that extent
the biography was in part eulogy. This was the continuation and
elaboration of a tradition, the nuances of which had to be known
to be comprehended. The occasion was a celebratory moment
and the outcome of critical events around which the biography
is written, observing a chronology. Snippets of history pertain to
the royal family, to political and marital alliances, and the crisis.
The biography was often written when authority and legitimacy
had to be emphasized and the mutation to courtly life established,
with some allusions to the past. Problematic events are sometimes
smoothened out by the intervention of a deity, but the deity is a
façade, its function being to endorse royal ambition. This is almost
invariably so in biographies where the rule of primogeniture is
broken. The action is justified as having been ordered by a deity,
or at the wish of the dying father, or by showing the elder brother
to be incompetent.2
2. Writing Biographies in the Context
of the Itihāsa-Purāṇa
In the period subsequent to the seventh century ad, the more
relevant segments of the itihāsa-purāṇa tradition were not dis-
continued but given new forms, being incorporated in new genres
of texts. However, the future tense of the prophetic form, used
in recounting dynasties in the Purāṇas, gives way to the present
tense of contemporary times in the biographies. The significance
of these genres has to be seen in a changed historical situation.
They centre on the king’s relations with his subordinate chiefs and
functionaries, a complement or a counterpoint to the inscriptions
that provide yet another official version of the more important
aspects of a reign.
2 V.S. Pathak, Historians of Ancient India, 69–71.
474 The Past Before Us
There was also something of a bifurcation in the itihāsa-purāṇa
tradition because the Purāṇas became texts associated with reli-
gious sectarian worship, whereas the more historical concerns
came to be expressed in other kinds of literature. Dynastic lists
peter out in the Purāṇas after the Gupta dynasty, or approximately
the mid-first millennium ad. They were now incorporated into
royal biographies, and even more so in epigraphic documents, and
later in chronicles. The tradition of using the past as a reference
point for the present becomes significant to these new genres.
Mention is made of the ākhyāyikās, said to be based on actual
happenings, and these were linked to the ākhyāna, itihāsa, and
purāṇa, of the historical tradition.
The term carita—literally “moving”, “doing”, “going”—refers
to the activities of a person. The protagonists were kings and
occasionally ministers. The narrative is not boxed into a series of
larger or smaller stories, as often happens in the kathā, but stands
on its own in a linear form. The caritas, in describing the origin
myths of the dynasty, often linked them to heroes from the Puranic
genealogies or deities. The early history and antecedents of both
the subject and the author involve justifying those actions which
deviate from accepted norms. Such explanations often derive from
the remembered tradition of the past and of earlier rulers.
Among the concerns of the itihāsa-purāṇa tradition was the
political legitimacy of lineage and dynasty. Political power was
open to all castes, although theoretically confined to the kṣatriya,
which, although it contradicted the normative codes, accompanied
the growth of kingdoms as state systems. Genealogies were resort-
ed to even as statements of caste. Status could be acquired through
marriage alliances, using at times the ceremony of a svayamvara,
evoking past practices. The symbolism of the digvijaya, or con-
quest of the four quarters, could be a symbolic claim to political
power and not necessarily a statement of actual conquest; hence
the frequency of formulaic descriptions of such conquests, and the
inclusion sometimes of names of clan territories from the ancient
past. These features associated with the earlier tradition, although
transformed in meaning, were carried over into the courtly cul-
ture of the later monarchies. Where dynasties claim to be of the
Sūryavaṃśa or the Candravaṃśa lineages and latch themselves
Historical Biographies 475
onto the relevant descent list from the Purāṇas, there the record
of these links becomes even more central to the present, although
there is a tacit admission that the past was different.
The eulogistic component of the caritas was symptomatic of
courtly literature, comparable to similar literature from other parts
of the medieval world.3 There was a selected core of information
on contemporary events around which was woven a framework
of eulogy. This was composed in elegant courtly language, replete
with linguistic virtuosity and sophisticated allusions to classical
learning. It was the formal picture of the ideal king according to
existing canons. To an extent, the subject of the biography was an
exemplar. This was particularly important where dynasties came
from newly established families anxious that they be respected.
Vices and virtues were exemplified for moral instruction, as they
had been in the Aśokāvadāna. There were also some supposedly
divine utterances and predictions to support the actions of people
in high places. The desire to link the accepted past to the present
may well have been motivated by the fear of alienation from this
past.
The writing of the carita was in part an attempt to link the new
dynasty with earlier dynasties. Desirable antecedents often had to
include references to a local culture in the process of acquiring
social elevation. The Puranic tradition remained an initial refer-
ence point for this. Where the authors of the biographies were also
Bhṛgu brāhmaṇas, this would have provided a familiar approach
to the subject.4 The proliferation of royal courts through the in-
crease in the number of small and new kingdoms meant that kings
vied with each other for the services of the better court-poets.
This often resulted in the biography including embellishments
in the style of court poetry, which happily subordinated histori-
cal authenticity to a well-turned phrase. The biography therefore
became, as it often did in other parts of the contemporary world,
a form of legitimizing a dynasty and publicizing the activities of
3 R.W. Southern, “Aspects of the European Tradition of Historical Writing”,
1970, 20, 173–96; 1971, 21, 159–79; 1972, 22, 159–80; 1973, 23, 243–63; W.J.
Brandt, The Shape of Medieval History.
4 V.S. Pathak, Historians of Ancient India, 12, 34, 52.
476 The Past Before Us
a king. At the same time, it articulated and validated the culture
of the royal court, which had now become significantly different
from pre-Gupta times.5 The earlier courts had been less formal,
less anxious to follow uniform patterns of court culture, and were
characterized by an openness of language and style.
Among the many other reasons for the interest in royal biog-
raphies may have been the growth of varieties of bhakti sects and
teaching, where the actions of the individual were central to the as-
sessment of his/her life, and therefore to the condition of the future
life. The endorsement of the ideas of karma and samsāra, actions
conditioning rebirth, which by now were widespread, could well
have encouraged the assessment of individual actions.
3. The Evolution of the Biographical Form
The germ of the carita tradition was perhaps the dāna-stuti hymns
of the Ṛg Veda, with their praise of individual heroes and seminal
connection to the longer hero-lauds of the epics. The early inscrip-
tions eulogizing rulers were probably effective in encouraging the
biographical form. Thus, Khāravela in the first century bc, ruling
in Kaliṅga, in eastern India, provides a chronological résumé of his
reign.6 From western India, Gotami Balasiri, queen-mother to the
Sātavāhana ruler Siri Sātakaṇi Gotamiputa, refers to the achieve-
ments of her son in a miniature carita, the inscription containing
elements which were later characteristic of historical biography.7
He prevented the mixing of the four varṇas, a phrase which was
to become a fairly common qualifier, but which remained largely
rhetorical for it was not adhered to in practice. The only noticeably
missing reference is to an appropriate marriage alliance.8
Parallel to the inscriptions, and described as pratimāgṛhas
(image houses), are a few sculptures carrying the names of kings
who had died, such as those of the Sātavāhanas, and some others
5 Daud Ali, Courtly Culture and Political Life in Early Medieval India.
6 Hathigumpha Inscription of Khāravela, Ep. Ind., 20, 71ff.
7 Nasik Cave Inscription of Gotami Balasiri, Ep. Ind., 8, no. 2, 59ff.
8 Kṣatrapa inscriptions refer to a marriage alliance which apparently led to
Rudradāman being lenient in his campaign against the Sātavāhanas.
Historical Biographies 477
at Naneghat, and of the Kuṣāṇas at Maṭ near Mathura.9 These ap-
pear not to be portraits but representations. The Pratimānāṭaka,
a play by Bhāsa, refers to statues of dead kings but this is not
evidence enough of their being portraits. A couple of panels at
the stūpa at Kanaganahalli carry label inscriptions that read “rāyā
asoko”, but these again are representations of Aśoka Maurya and
not portraits.10 Portraiture was not popular, despite descriptions
in plays of kings painting portraits of their beloveds. Portraits on
coins introduced by the Indo-Bactrian Greeks were bypassed by
the Guptas, who preferred to depict an action instead. Hero-stones
set up as memorials to dead heroes represent the hero symboli-
cally but do not claim to be portraits.11 It is almost as if the portrait
resemblance was unimportant as long as its presence was indicated
by a representation. There may possibly have been a belief that
portraits were inauspicious.
Biographical writing as a form is likely to have been influenced
by the treatment of the lives of kings and Elders in Buddhist and
Jaina texts. The traditions were not segregated, even if observed
as distinct. Aśvaghoṣa’s Buddhacarita was an innovation despite
the poetic embellishments enveloping the historical person. The
authors of the biographies would have read the Buddhacarita,
which was likely to have been influential as literature, even among
the brāhmaṇa literati.
Statements about individual rulers in early inscriptions were
minimal but they were based on historical information. Compari-
sons were made with the heroes of the epics, now relegated to the
remote past. These early inscriptions were generally statements
on the specific achievements of the king but they did not gener-
ally carry detailed references to the genealogical antecedents of
the ruler. This was a marked feature of the later period, where
the genealogy and ancestry, even if partially fictitious, become
a statement of status. Nevertheless, there is enough even in the
9 A.M. Shastri, The Sātavāhanas and the Western Kṣatrapas; J.M. Rosen-
field, The Dynastic Arts of the Kushans; H. Bakker, “Monuments to the Dead”;
P. Granoff, “Worship as Commemoration . . .”, 181–202.
10 R. Thapar, “Rāyā Asoko from Kanaganahalli: Some Thoughts”, 249–62.
11 S. Settar and G.D. Sontheimer (eds), Memorial Stones; R. Thapar, “Death
and the Hero”, in Cultural Pasts, 680–95.
478 The Past Before Us
002
0
sertemoliK
seitsanyD
dna
,snalC
,secalP
tnatropmI
eroM
eht
fo
snoitacoL
:5
paM
E
G
N
A
R
agnaG
A
Y
A
noS
L
A
M
I
r a k o r
a m Indu
E
s
A T Beas
H G
Ya
a
m
ng
u
a
na labm ahC
e g n
a R a y
K a R h d
h
s
u
G
mulehJ
banehC
ivaR
jeltuS
n iV
adam
raN
Tapi
K
Kabul
u
d
egnaR
nam
ia
n lu
S i H
sudnI
dnamleH
LUBAK
rasenahT IHLED
juanaK
APŪRMĀK
ANAHDRAVARD.N.UP
IRDNERAV
inujragaN
slliH
rabaraB sevaC
AVALĀM
ATAKLOK
idanahaM
AYKULĀC
21
retpahC
,5
paM
Historical Biographies 479
earlier inscriptions, and in the narrative poems on the heroes of
the Buddhists, Jainas, and Bhāgavatas, to provide a curtain-raiser
for the historical biography.
The two examples of caritas that I have chosen are Bāṇabhaṭṭa’s
Harṣacarita and Sandhyākaranandin’s Rāmacarita.
THE HARṢACARITA OF BĀṆABHAṬṬA
1. Bāṇabhaṭṭa
The first major royal biography was the Harṣacarita, a biogra-
phy of king Harṣavardhana written by Bāṇabhaṭṭa in the seventh
century ad.12 One view dates it to c. 620, which is now generally
accepted, although others have argued for a slightly later date.13
The two most quoted works of Bāṇa are somewhat different in
character: the Harṣacarita is a biography of the early part of the
life of Harṣavardhana, and the Kādambarī is fiction and poetic
fantasy of a high order. Harṣa eventually ruled from Kānyakubja,
more often referred to as Kanauj, in the western Ganges plain.
The Harṣacarita has the characteristic features of a carita. It
begins with invocatory verses to Śiva and Pārvatī, presumably
the deities worshipped by the author, and probably also by the
subject of the biography. It includes mention of previous poets
of renown such as Vyāsa, Hāla, Pravarasena, Bhāsa, Kālidāsa,
Guṇāḍhya—writing in Sanskrit and in Prākrit. Bāṇa is stating
his literary ancestry before recounting his lineal descent. His was
a literary family with a father-in-law who was a poet and a son
who, it is thought, completed Bāṇa’s unfinished work of fiction,
the Kādambarī.
In the first two chapters (ucchvāsas) Bāṇa, in accordance with
convention, traces his descent back to deities and sages. The
goddess Sarasvatī was cursed by the ṛṣi Durvāsas to spend time
12 Bāṇabhaṭṭa, Harṣacarita, ed. K.P. Parab; The Harshacarita of Bāṇabhaṭṭa,
ed. P.V. Kane (hereafter Kane); E.B. Cowell and F.W. Thomas (trans.), The Harṣa-
carita of Bāṇa (hereafter Cowell and Thomas). References to the Kane edition
are to chapter numbers followed by page numbers.
13 D. Devahuti, Harsha: A Political Study, 3, 11; Shankar Goyal, History and
Historiography of the Age of Harṣa, 61ff.; S.R. Goyal, Harṣa and Buddhism,
143ff.
480 The Past Before Us
on earth. She settles in a forest on the banks of the river Śona and
by accident meets Dadhīca, a Bhṛgu, and bears him a son. This
releases her from the curse and she returns to the celestial world.
Gods and humans mingle, as is characteristic in mythology, and
the gods behave like humans. The story echoes that of Purūravas
and Urvaśī from the Vedas. The boy left behind grows up with a
foster mother, also a Bhṛgu, and her son, Vatsa, but later chooses to
become an ascetic. From Vatsa there descended the Vātsyāyanas.
Among them and much later were born the lineage of Bāṇa. This
is the effective part of the genealogy. The association with the
Bhṛgus is important to him as a writer of itihāsa.
It has been asked why Bāṇa gave priority to information on
his own life in the initial chapters rather than beginning with the
biography of the king, as in other carita texts. Was he assuming
that his status as a Vātsyāyana brāhmaṇa should have precedence
as it was higher than that of Harṣa, said to be a vaiśya? Or, had there
been some doubt about his choice as a biographer, a doubt that is
perhaps hinted at by the unconventional company that he kept?
Establishing the credentials of the author was crucial to the au-
thenticity of the biography and the legitimation of the subject.
There follows a description of the agrahāra (a brāhmaṇa settle-
ment on a royal donation of land) of Prītikūṭa on the banks of the
Śona, where his family resided, and which predictably Bāṇa claims
as the place where Sarasvatī stayed for a brief while. In describing
the activities of the village he makes particular mention of the
reading of the Vāyu Purāṇa and adds that it was also recited by a
bard. This seems to suggest literacy on the part of some, with a
continuing oral rendition by bards.
Bāṇa’s parents having died in his youth, he was free to discover
the world and draw around him a range of unorthodox companions.
These are listed by name and occupation and not by caste, perhaps
because most of their occupations were of the lower castes, with
the exception of a few poets and singers. With such a range, their
genealogies have to be dispensed with. Bāṇa makes no secret of
his earlier bohemian life and rather unconventional ways, which,
when he reformed them, won him royal favour.
Harṣa’s invitation to Bāṇa comes in a roundabout way through
a kinsman who is said to have a sūdra mother. Bāṇa hesitates as
Historical Biographies 481
he is critical of those who serve at the court, arguing that they
become sycophants and lose their independence. But eventually
he decides to go. Bāṇa’s family obviously has some connections
with the court, else he would not have been sent for, particularly
as the initial comment of the king about him is not exactly com-
plimentary. He also makes a point of mentioning that the person
whom he regards as his teacher was much revered at the Maukhari
court, where Harṣa’s sister had been married.
After three days of travel he arrives at the skandhāvāra (military
camp) of Harṣa. This is a huge spectacle, with crowds of people,
many sectarian groups, many kings from elsewhere, and large
numbers of animals, including horses with caṇḍāla grooms. In
effect, this was a mobile royal court together with a civilian popu-
lation accompanying the army (and probably thereby reducing its
military effectiveness). Such camps are associated with kings on
the move, inspecting local administration, controlling feudatories
and other intermediaries, and fighting campaigns.
There follows an elaborate and highly eulogistic description
of Harṣa, more appropriate from a royal retainer than from a
critic of the royal court. Harṣa is compared to the heroes of the
Mahābhārata, and only the heroic qualities seem to count. Other
associations—such as Yudhiṣṭhira wishing to renounce kingship
and Arjuna being loath to do battle—are not mentioned. The
king is described as being calm of mind like the Buddha, carry-
ing out the duties of the varṇāśramadharma as directed in the
Dharmaśāstra of Manu and bearing the daṇḍa (rod) like Yama,
the god of death: all these were qualities expected of a ruler, and
doubtless Harṣa was assured of such a description when he chose
Bāṇa as his biographer.
The king finally invites Bāṇa to write the biography. After some
months at court, Bāṇa returns to his village with its ambience
of an ideal agrahāra—as described by Bāṇa. That Bāṇa was in
the king’s favour is made much of by his kinsmen. They request
Bāṇa to recite his composition, which they compare to a second
Mahābhārata. It is also said that the recitation will purify their
Bhṛgu vaṃśa, though we are not told how. The emphasis on his
being a Bhṛgu brāhmaṇa was doubtless an additional credential.
That the biography of the king would be written in the third person
482 The Past Before Us
is expected. But curiously Bāṇa writes on his own early life in the
third person as well. Is this an attempt to distance himself in order
to suggest the greater authenticity of the narrative?
The biography does not cover Harṣa’s entire reign but only his
early years until his acquisition of sovereignty over Kanauj. The
remaining years it is said were completed in a rather summary
fashion by Bāṇa’s son, Bhūṣana Bhaṭṭa. However, the earlier part
is the major portion of the text, and whether it was originally
intended to end where it does remains a matter of controversy. If
the Harṣacarita was written as a narrative leading up to Harṣa’s
accession and elevated title, then in its day perhaps the narrative
would not have been regarded as incomplete. Since Bāṇa does not
refer to the king being the author of three plays, they were presum-
ably written after the events described in the biography.
The format of a carita is said to consist of five stages: an intro-
duction to the subject of the biography, a description of his activi-
ties, the aspirations of the person, followed by efforts to achieve
these aspirations, and the eventual success.14 This format may
not always be adhered to, but here it is. The narrative requiring
eventual success limits biographies to those who have succeeded,
and to the point where the success is registered. Bāṇa addresses
three aspects of Harṣa’s life: his ancestry and the establishment of
the dynasty, his claim to the throne, and his aspiration to rule from
Kanauj—which would give him sovereignty over a substantial
kingdom.
2. The Biography of the King
The text begins with the king’s ancestry. The home base of the
family was Sthāṇvīśvara, modern Thanesar north of Delhi. The
land around it was extremely fertile, with buffaloes stained by
rolling in saffron! Cultivation using the water-wheel yielded a
rich harvest. The ultimate in well-being is asserted via comparison
with conditions in the earliest and utopian Kṛta age.
Harṣa was the sole ruler to give prominence to the short-lived
Puṣyabhūti/ Puṣpabhūti dynasty and ruled from 606 to 647. Other
14 Ibid., 47.
Historical Biographies 483
kingdoms competing for high status were the Later Guptas, the
Maukharis, the Maitrakas of Valabhī, and some further afield in
Gauḍa and Kāmarūpa in eastern India. The founding ancestor of
Harṣa’s family was Puṣpabhūti, who is the focus of the third chapter.
The ceremony of legitimation of this early ancestor is described.15
A Śaiva ascetic, Bhairavācārya, performs the mahākālahṛdaya
rite at a deserted temple in the cremation ground. He is assisted
by three disciples—Ṭīṭibha, Pātālasvāmi, and a Drāviḍa called
Karṇatāla—and by Puṣpabhūti. Whilst Bhairavācārya is seated on
a corpse during the ritual, a being arises from the earth, the Nāga
Śrikaṇṭha, who claims to be the lord of the region. The description
of the Nāga conforms to the conventional description of rākṣasas
and forest-dwellers. The king uses a magic sword, presented to him
earlier, to vanquish the Nāga, but does not kill him as he notices
him wearing a sacred thread. The sword then turns into a radiant
woman, the goddess of good fortune, Śrī, who offers him a boon.
He asks for the success of Bhairavācārya’s rite. Pleased with his
magnanimity, she prophesies that he will be ancestor to a line of
heroic kings, of whom the foremost will, predictably, be the cakra-
vartin Harṣa. Bhairavācārya, having successfully performed the
rite and become a Vidyādhara as he had wished, flies into the sky
and the goddess re-enters the earth. The Vidyādharas are linked
to magical powers and have an ancient and respected ancestry.
The rite was non-Vedic, the power and legitimacy coming from
the goddess. The only obvious concession made to Brahmanism
is the reference to the sacred thread. Yet in a Tantric ritual the
identity of caste would probably have been broken.
Thanesar was a centre of the Pāśupata Śaiva cult which, like
Tantric rituals, also involved worship of the goddess. Śiva worship
was now popular among court circles in northern India after the
Gupta period, where earlier Vaiṣṇava Bhāgavatism had been on
the rise. In the immediate post-Gupta period, Śaivism and Buddh-
ism seem to have been the contenders for royal patronage. As
a legitimation rite, the ritual differs from the Vedic sacrificial ritu-
als required of kṣatriyas. This deviation may have been because
the family is said to be vaiśya in some sources, their lower origin
15 Kane, 3.45; Cowell and Thomas, 3.111ff.
484 The Past Before Us
denying them kṣatriya rites in theory.16 The ritual was a concession
to local worship, bringing in a larger loyalty which helped clear
the path to kingship. It has been suggested that it may symbolize
the defeat of the Nāgas of Śūrasena by an ancestor of Harṣa.17
Another possibility could be that the area was given as a grant
to a brāhmaṇa in an earlier period who may then have associ-
ated himself with the culture of the forest-dwellers, emerging as
the Nāga but with a sacred thread. Such situations were not un-
known in the origins of principalities eventually evolving into
small kingdoms. The dynastic descent from Puṣpabhūti is given
but names are not mentioned. This is surpising since Harṣa in his
inscriptions names his immediate ancestors.
The scene then shifts to Harṣa’s childhood. The valour of his
father, Prabhākaravardhana, is described in resounding phrases
which become part of the conventional rhetoric of a king’s con-
quests. He was “a lion to the Hūṇa deer, a burning fever to the
king of the Indus land, a troubler of the sleep of Gujarat, a bilious
plague to that scent elephant the lord of Gandhāra, a looter to the
lawlessness of the Lāṭas, and an axe to the creeper of Mālwa’s
glory.”18 Despite the hyperbole, these were not permanent con-
quests since his sons were soon to be involved in campaigns
against some of those named. We know from inscriptions that
his father dropped the simple title of mahārāja to use the more
grandiose paramabhaṭṭāraka-mahārāja-adhirāja. The title marked
a change of status and the royal biography was also meant to un-
derline the change. Yet it is in this chapter that Bāṇa gives a list
of those ancient kṣatriyas who, because of acts of misdemeanour,
came to grief. This suggests that whatever the act of legitimation
might have achieved, reference to the ancient kṣatriya tradition
had still to be recalled from time to time.
Prabhākaravardhana had three children. The eldest son was
Rājyavardhana and the younger was Harṣa. Rājyaśrī was their
16 T. Watters, On Yuan Chwang’s Travels in India, vol. I, 344–5;
Āryamañjuśrīmūlakalpa, ed. T.N. Ganapati Sastri; K.P. Jayaswal (ed. and trans.),
An Imperial History of India, 28.
17 D. Devahuti, Harsha: A Political Study, 67–8; Cowell and F.W. Thomas,
3.124.
18 Kane, 4.56; Cowell and Thomas, 4.132ff.
Historical Biographies 485
sister. Much is made of Harṣa’s birth and the auspicious signs
that accompanied it, as also the drunken festivities. Bhaṇḍi, the
mother’s brother’s son, was appointed to serve the princes. Later,
the two sons of the Mālava king are also appointed as companions,
an indication of their subordinate status. The marriage of Rājyaśrī
to Grahavarman, the Maukhari ruler of Kanauj, is agreed upon.
This was either marrying into a peer group family, or better, one
that was a rung higher.
The fifth chapter mentions renewed attacks by the Hūṇas.
Rājyavardhana, accompanied by his younger brother, was sent to
hold them back. Meanwhile, their father fell ill and Harṣa had to
hurriedly return to the capital. As he was leaving the camp, there
were two ill omens—the cry of a crow and the appearance of a
naked Jaina monk! The father’s condition was clearly serious and
various rites were being performed, most of them non-Vedic, such
as a Drāviḍa who prayed to a vetāla with the offering of a skull.
The doctor attending on him was called Rasāyaṇa, normally mean-
ing “alchemy”. Strangely, the elder son was not sent for, perhaps
because he was conducting the campaign. With the king’s condi-
tion deteriorating, the queen decided to become a satī. Bāṇa does
not criticize this action, although he opposed the idea in his other
work, the Kādambarī.
The father on his deathbed lists the principles by which his son
should govern: acquiring territory, maintaining the treasury, con-
trolling intermediaries or feudatories, upholding royalty even if
burdensome, protecting subjects, bearing arms, controlling self-
indulgence, and exterminating enemies. These aspects are partly
in consonance with the earlier saptāṅga theory—the seven cons-
titiuents of the state discussed by Kauṭilya. But the new feature
is the presence of sāmantas, creating a layer of intermediaries
between king and subject, and the protection of the subject being
now at one remove. The command to control self-indulgence was
a critique presumably of royal extravagance.
It is implied that the father seemed to prefer Harṣa as his suc-
cessor, but Harṣa did not wish to supersede his elder brother.
The death of their father, their mother becoming a satī, over-
whelms both brothers with grief. Rājyavardhana was not al-
together averse to Harṣa succeeding to the throne; his interest
486 The Past Before Us
in Buddhism may have been a reason for his diffidence, it being
suggested that he may have contemplated joining a Buddhist
order. Prabhākaravardhana being a worshipper of Sūrya may not
have approved of his elder son’s inclination towards Buddhism.
Nor does Bāṇa mention that Rājyavardhana did rule for a brief
period—as stated in Harṣa’s inscriptions.19 There is a hint that
Harṣa was the more ambitious, and that there may have been some
rivalry over the succession. Clearly, the eventual succession of
the younger brother had to be justified in the biography. The pace
of the narrative picks up halfway through the book. Descriptions
become briefer and conversations are reported. Rājyavardhana
expresses his distaste for kingship and preference for a hermitage,
reminiscent of Yudhiṣṭhira in the Mahābhārata. Harṣa wonders
if his brother is testing him by these remarks. Harṣa it is said was
averse to breaking the rule of primogeniture.
Further bad news informs them of the killing of their sister
Rājyaśrī’s husband, the Maukhari ruler of Kanauj. The assassin
is the ruler of Mālava, and thus a feudatory of Thanesar. Rājyaśrī
had been imprisoned but escaped and was now somewhere in the
Vindhyan forest. It is curious that she did not return to Thane-
sar, instead of seeking refuge in the Vindhyas. There is also the
threat of an impending attack on Thanesar by the Mālava ruler.
Rājyavardhana insists that a rebellious feudatory has to be pun-
ished for, as he puts it, a frog cannot slap a cobra, or a calf take
the tiger captive, or a hind clutch the lion’s mane. Rājyavardhana
leaves to defend the kingdom but is treacherously killed by
Śaśāṅka, the king of Gauḍa in eastern India. Their hostility was
political, but it could also have had a religious undertone since
Śaśāṅka, according to Buddhist sources, was anti-Buddhist. Linked
to the events leading to Rājyavardhana’s death is a lengthy digres-
sion on twenty-eight earlier kings, some of whom are historically
known, who, moving away from the path of dharma, were killed
in various ways by disgruntled officers, courtiers and others.20
Some of the names are also referred to in the dynastic lists of the
19 V.S. Pathak, Historians of Ancient India, 55.
20 Kane, 6.105–6; Cowell and Thomas, 6.221–4. These include the assassina-
tion of the Mauryan Bṛhadratha by the Śuṅga Puṣyamitra, and the killing of the
Śaka king by Candra Gupta II in order to rescue the queen, Devī, as narrated
in Viśākhadatta’s play, Devīcandragupta (see Chapter 8).
Historical Biographies 487
Purāṇas, but Bāṇa’s list does not follow a chronological order.
His digression is either an indirect comment on the inherent
inefficiency of Harṣa’s brother to rule, or intended to warn Harṣa
against court intrigue. The killing of Rājyavardhana is entangled
in the politics of North India at that time.
By the seventh chapter Harṣa assumes kingship and is preparing
a campaign against Gauḍa. There is a hint that he was in any case
inclined to do both and was nudged towards it by Lakṣmī, the god-
dess of prosperity. This was yet another intervention of a deity, but
a goddess. He declares that in addition to avenging the death of his
brother and rescuing his sister, he wishes to conduct a digvijaya.21
This would reflect a wish to at least retain the rhetoric of king-
ship, although the digvijaya no longer had the same resonance as
in the Vedas and epics. This was both a statement of his claim to
power, perhaps a necessary formality before he could assume the
titles which his father had held, as well as a prelude to rituals of
sovereignty in imitation of earlier times. Harṣa’s aspiration to be
a successful digvijayin is compared to the exploits of the ancient
heroes of the Mahābhārata.22 The figures that are given for the
vario us wings of the army are of course highly exaggerated, as they
generally were in the ancient world. A huge commissariat accom-
panied the military force; nevertheless, villages near where they
camped were pillaged.23 Both the inflated figures and the pillag -
ing were aspects of the exercise of power.24
Harṣa’s immediate concern being to find his sister, he sets out
with his army. This becomes symbolic of a digvijaya, as he even-
tually ruled from Kanauj when he established his sovereignty.
Kanauj was more strategically located, commanding a rich agrar-
ian region and at the hub of trade, different from the more limited
income which came to Thanesar. The digvijaya was not necess arily
a military campaign but could be an assertion of control over de-
signated territory. The preliminary gift-giving is reminiscent of
rituals that demonstrate excessive wealth. In earlier times gifts were
distributed after the digvijaya, but here the “campaign” follows
21 Kane, 6.106 and 7.108–9; Cowell and Thomas, 6.223–4.
22 Kane, 7.239; Cowell and Thomas, 7.114.
23 Kane, 7.112; Cowell and Thomas, 7.235.
24 R. Thapar, “The Role of the Army in the Exercise of Power in Early
India”, 25–38.
488 The Past Before Us
gift-giving. Was this because the campaign had become more
symbolic? Bāṇa’s account of the march and the setting up of camp,
the skandhāvāra, includes passing mention of a disgruntled coun-
tryside with a few mutterings about the prevalent poverty. Some
peasants even comment on the right of the king to rule. Was this
linked in any way with the presence of Lokāyata thinkers in their
midst who argued that the king is appointed by the will of the
people, a sentiment also reflected in the earliest Buddhist texts?
At this point Bhāskaravarman, the king of Kāmarūpa (in Assam),
also recently risen in status, requests a treaty with Harṣa, for he
too is battling against their common enemy, the king of Gauḍa.25
The alliance is accompanied by a large number of gifts for Harṣa.
Among these the umbrella is singled out, presumably as an indi-
cation of his acceptance of Harṣa’s sovereignty. The genealogy
of Bhāskaravaraman is given but only the names of the earliest
ancestors are listed. At one point mention is made of a mahārājā
whose great-grandson was a mahārājādhirāja, pointing to the
commonly occurring political mutation in these times. Judging
by these titles both Harṣa and Bhāskaravarman were of the same
status, but now Harṣa was recognized as superior. Both kings are
said to be patrons of the Śaivas.
The king of Gauḍa, who had also started his career as a feuda-
tory,26 was anxious to establish an independent kingdom. His
alliance with the ruler of Mālava was intended as a two-pronged
movement against Kanauj, as was the alliance of Harṣa and Bhās-
karavarman against Śaśāṅka. Bāṇa’s references to Śaśāṅka are not
complimentary, although he concedes the brilliance with which
he gradually manoeuvred the forces of his allies and feudatories
against Harṣa. Buddhist sources depict him as a persecutor of
Buddhists.27 Bhaṇḍi arrives at Harṣa’s court, ashamed that he could
not protect Rājyavardhana. Harṣa is asked to inspect the enormous
booty taken from the campaign against Mālava, and this is then put
under the control of overseers.28 Campaigns are a ready source of
25 Kane, 7.118; Cowell and Thomas, 7.246.
26 Rohtasgadh Seal-matrix of the Mahāsāmanta Śaśānkadeva, Corpus Inscrip-
tionum Indicarim, III.78, 283–4.
27 Āryamañjuśrīmūlakalpa, 49, no. 33ff.; K.P. Jayaswal (ed. and trans.), The
Imperial History of India, vv. 715–23.
28 Kane, 7.122–3; Cowell and Thomas, 7.254.
Historical Biographies 489
wealth. Booty is differentiated from theft, considered legitimate,
and distributed according to its own rules.29
The scene shifts again to a village in the heart of the Vindhyas,
where Harṣa meets the young chiefs (described as sāmantas) of
the Śabara and other forest tribes.30 These areas are yet to be en-
veloped in sanskritic culture-ways and the description is therefore
valuable in depicting the non-caste, tribal or clan-based societies
still extensive in this region. The location was probably on the
frontier of the kingdom of Harṣa or of the Maukharis. Who actu-
ally controls these forest is ambiguous since most of the inhabi-
tants live by hunting. The state derives income from timber and
elephants, both being under its control. The settlements consist of
huts of bamboo and reed. Those who live there organize their own
protection against thieves and predators. A rudimentary system
of guards and village headmen was probably more a protection
in theory than practice.31
Bāṇa’s detailed description of these villages is a glimpse of
the process by which kingdoms were extending their control
over forested areas, converting forests to cultivable land. Forest-
dwellers, earlier given to hunting, gathering, and shifting agri-
culture, were now being converted into settled peasants—in this
case the Śabaras, the name occurring frequently in references to
forest peoples. Pockets of the earlier pattern of life did, however,
continue.
In the eighth chapter the king goes into the deeper part of the
forest, rather like the epic heroes, in contrast to the villages on
the edge. Rājyaśrī is still being sought. Sovereignty extends to the
forest despite the forest being distanced from civilization. The
chief of the forest tribe, designated as aṭavika-sāmanta, goes by
the formulaic name for such persons, Vyāghraketu, invoking the
tiger. The description bears the same features as that of all forest-
dwellers from earlier literature—a dark body, flat nose, thick lips,
heavy jaws, projecting cheek bones, and moving through the forest
like a dense black cloud or a mass of black collyrium—all familiar
from the description of the Niṣāda, Pulinda, Bhilla, and from the
29 Manu’s Code of Law, 7.96–7.
30 Kane, 8.125; Cowell and Thomas, 8.259.
31 Kane, 7.122–3; Cowell and Thomas, 7.255ff.
490 The Past Before Us
rākṣasas of the Rāmāyaṇa. Just as one thinks that there is now
a greater acceptance of forest people, no longer called rākṣasas,
there follows a string of expletives about them. But at least they
are not violently killed, as in the past. The settlement (grāma) was
gradually coming to terms with the forest (araṇya).
Harṣa makes enquiries about his sister and is directed to the
hermitage of a Buddhist ascetic, Divākaramitra. He is said to
be a brāhmaṇa who became a Buddhist—not uncommon at the
time—and that he was a childhood friend of Grahavarman, the late
husband of Rājyaśrī.32 This turns out to be the habitat of persons
with various religious affiliations, including Buddhists, Jainas,
Bhāgavatas, Śaivas, Lokāyatas teaching materialism, alchemists,
reciters of the Purāṇas, and grammarians,33 so wide an intel-
lectual range that one wonders what was specifically Buddhist
about it. The persons collected here are a mirror image of Bāṇa’s
youthful companions. The repeated presence of the unorthodox
Lokāyatas is an interesting facet of such hermitages. The place
has an ambience which is in some ways reminiscent of the earlier
kutuhala-śālās, the parks at the edge of cities where debates took
place. However, the references are generally sympathetic to the
Buddhists, though some humorous satire is irresistible, as in the
statements that even the parrots were expounding Śākya śāstras
(Buddhist texts), and that the tigers had given up eating meat! In
essentials the hermitage has the ambience of gentle intellectual
activity.
Harṣa’s sister is eventually found—in the nick of time, as she
is about to immolate herself. The text ends with the happy return
home of brother and sister together with Divākaramitra, and
finally the coronation of Harṣa. It has been argued that the sister
is also to be seen as allegorical and represents the goddess Śrī, the
goddess of Good Fortune.34 The episode is therefore symbolic of
the settling of good fortune on Harṣa, and to that extent completes
the function of the biography. At a more mundane level the rescue
of his sister was essential to his ambition as she strengthened his
claim to sovereignty over Kanauj, earlier held by his brother-in-
32 Kane, 8.126; Cowell and Thomas, 8.261–2.
33 Kane, 8.128; Cowell and Thomas, 8.265ff.
34 V.S. Pathak, Historians of Ancient India, 30–56.
Historical Biographies 491
law. The sovereignty was significant to the politics of northern
India, as confirmed by subsequent dynasties that battled over the
control of Kanauj. The succession would normally have gone to
Grahavarman’s brother, but he had died early. Kanauj had access
not only to the Ganges river system but also to routes to Central
and north-western India. With the decline of Mathura in the Gupta
period, Kanauj came into focus.35
The attempt in the biography was therefore not to cover the
entire life of the king, but to focus on the acquisition and estab-
lish ing of sovereignty over Kanauj. The Harṣacarita is the pro -
totype of the genre. While it draws on some elements of the
continuing tradition, it does not depend on the kṣatriya legitima-
tion which is characteristic of some later biographies. The reign
of Harṣavardhana was close enough to the period when such
legitimation was not required, and his personal involvement
with Buddhism and Śaivism may not have encouraged him to
perform Vedic rituals. That his sovereignty was acknowledged
is suggested in the inscription of the Cālukya king Pulakeśin II,
who defeated Harṣa’s attempt to conquer south of the Narmada.36
References to Harṣa’s authority in the inscription are doubtless
exaggerated in part by having to compliment Pulakeśin II for
having restrained such a formidable foe. The inscription dates
to ad 634, therefore the biography is likely to have been written
before Harṣa’s defeat.
3. Other Sources Complementing
the Biography
Among the other texts of that time are the king’s grants of land
recorded in inscriptions.37 Bāṇa provides a limited genealogy of
Harṣa’s ancestors, but this is fleshed out in the inscriptions. In these,
35 Watters, On Yuan Chwang’s Travels in India, vol. I, 340ff.; Alberuni’s In-
dia, vol. I, 200–9; idem, vol. II, 316–20. Brāhmaṇa horse traders are referred
to as making donations to temples at Kanauj: Peheva Inscription, Ep. Ind., 1,
184–90.
36 Aihole Inscription of Pulakesin II, Ep. Ind., 6, 6, v.23.
37 E.g., Madhuban Copper Plate, Ep. Ind., 1, 67, 7, 155; Banskhera Plate of
Harshavardhana, Ep. Ind., 4, 208; Sonpat Copper Seal Inscription of Harsha-
vardhana, Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, III, 52, 231.
492 The Past Before Us
the founding ancestor Puṣpabhūti is absent and is replaced by three
previous kings: mahārāja Naravardhana, mahārāja Rājyavar -
dhana I, and mahārāja Ādityavardhana, before the mention of
Harṣa’s father. The wives of each are also listed so that there is
no ambiguity about the person referred to.38 Both inscriptions are
in the era started by Harṣa, calculated from ad 606, and refer to
the past. The story of Puṣpabhūti as a founding ancestor may not
have been considered appropriate to official genealogies of Harṣa’s
reign, when he had acquired the sovereignty linked to Kanauj,
since the myth suggests an obscure origin.39 Instead of counter-
ing the myth or creating an alternative, it may have been thought
better just to ignore it. The intention here would be to claim that
Harṣa’s family always had status as substantial intermediaries and
they improved on this, as suggested by their titles.
Whereas the earlier kings are referred to as mahārājas, Harṣa’s
father takes the title of paramabhaṭṭāraka-mahārājādhirāja,
claiming to rule an independent polity. He is also described con-
ventionally as protecting the varṇāśramadharma—the laws of
caste. He is said to be a worshipper of Sūrya, as were his father
and grandfather, although the earlier ancestor in Bāṇa’s narrative
performed Tantric rites. Bāṇa mentions Taraka, a Maga brāhmaṇa
astrologer at the court who prophesies the greatness of Harṣa.
The Maga brāhmaṇas, linked to sun-worship, came from western
India and may well have had connections with sun cults even
further west. The choice of religious sects as recipients of royal
patronage varied within the same ruling family and even with
the same king. The ancestors are associated with Śaivism and
Tantra, Prabhākaravardhana with the worship of Sūrya, Rājyavar -
dhana with Buddhism, and Harṣa with Buddhism and Śaivism.
Some were personal preferences, others were tied to political
considerations. There is inscriptional reference to Rājyavardhana
II, Harṣa’s elder brother.
An interesting coincidence is the reference in inscriptions to a
38 Banskhera Plate, Ep. Ind., 4, 208; Madhuban Copper Plate, Ep. Ind., 1,
67; 7, 155.
39 Clay seals of Nalanda, Ep. Ind., 21, 72; Sonpat Copper Seal Inscription of
Harsha, Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, III, 231.
Historical Biographies 493
senior official, Skandagupta, with the designation of dūtaka, and
dating to 628 and 631.40 He may have been identical with the official
mentioned by Bāṇa as giving friendly advice of a political nature
to the king. A large range of officers and feudatories are listed, and
this hierarchy is reflected in the biography as well. Another dūtaka
carries the grand scribal title of mahākṣapaṭalādhikaranādhikṛta
sāmanta-mahārāja.41 One of these inscriptions is more literary in
content and may have been drafted by Harṣa who, judging by the
plays attributed to him, may have cultivated a literary turn. What
was finally engraved was presumably not the actual draft of the
king, for it bears the occasional linguistic error.
Two of the plays attributed to Harṣa, the Priyadarśikā and the
Ratnāvalī, are conventional romances which focus on Udayana,
a king of earlier times made famous through a cycle of plays by
Bhāsa. The third play, Nāgānanda, has a different mood. The hero
sacrifices his life to save a snake deity and is restored to life by
the goddess Gaurī, and he emerges as a cakravartin. Interestingly,
he becomes a cakravartin not through conquest or the rule of law
but through the favour of a deity: an innovation in the concept.
This is a parallel to Harṣa’s acquisition of sovereignty through
the goddess Śrī. The play epitomizes dāna (gift-giving), and the
Buddha’s blessings are invoked. It could have been interpreted by
some as empathizing with Buddhist ethics.42
Xuanzang, the Chinese Buddhist pilgrim travelling through
India during Harṣa’s reign, left a detailed itinerary with comments
on what he saw.43 He is as consistent in projecting Harṣa as a patron
of Buddhism as are the inscriptions in giving him a Śaiva identity.
Among many other events, Xuanzang and his biographer, Hwui
Li, describe the vast quinquennial religious assemblies called by
Harṣa at Kanauj and at Prayāga (modern Allahabad). At Kanauj
40 Cowell and Thomas, 6.219; Ep. Ind., 4, 208–11; ibid., 1.67ff.
41 Shankar Goyal, “The Recently Discovered Kurukshetra-Varanasi Grant
of Harsha: Year 23”, 193–203.
42 D. Devahuti, Harsha: A Political Study, 178–80; S.R. Goyal, Harsha and
Buddhism.
43 S. Beal, Buddhist Records of the Western World; T. Watters, On Yuan
Chwang’s Travels in India; S. Beal (trans.), The Life of Hiuen-Tsiang by the
Shaman Hwui Li.
494 The Past Before Us
there were eighteen important kings in attendance, and many
thousands of priests of various denominations. The assembly was
held in the great enclosure where kings and nobles were wont to
bestow charity.44 There was a distribution from the royal treasury
both to members of various religious sects and to those who
were impoverished. This would be a spectacular manifestation
of the shift from yajña (sacrifice) to dāna (gift-giving) as forms
of legitimation.
Bāṇa’s Kādambarī is as a work of fiction in some ways a coun-
terpoint to the Harṣacarita. It has a complex structure of sub-
narratives within the main narrative.45 The story occurs with some
variations again in a part of Somadeva’s Kathāsaritasāgara of the
eleventh century, perhaps going back to Gunāḍhya’s Bṛhatkathā.
The story is located in the forests of the Vindhyas, the habitat of the
Śabara tribes, and may reflect Bāṇa’s experience of these forests
when accompanying Harṣa. The Kādambarī acts as the structural
opposite of the Harṣacarita—in that the royal biography is the text
on the court and settled society (the grāma), whilst the Kādambarī
is a fantasy based on the court poet’s perception of the forest (the
araṇya). There is a tendency to romanticize the forest in this work,
which is somewhat ironic, given that some of these forests were
being cut down to become the agrarian base of kingdoms.
Some of the families mentioned in the Harṣacarita are also
known from their inscriptions, such as the Maukharis.46 Bāṇa com-
pares the joining of the two houses in marriage as that of the Sun
and the Moon.47 This could be an attempt to introduce accepted
lineages, the solar and the lunar, or merely a poetic simile. The
Maukharis claimed descent from the hundred sons of Aśvapati and
the latter claimed links with the Kekeyas or Madras,48 of kṣatriya
status, although not the most exalted.
44 S. Beal, Buddhist Records of the Western World, vol. 1, 233 ; S. Beal (trans.),
The Life of Hiuen-Tsiang by the Shaman Hwui Li, vol. 5, 176–81.
45 A.B. Keith, A History of Sanskrit Literature, 319ff.
46 Haraha Inscription of Ishanavarman, Ep. Ind., 14, 110; Asirgadh Copper
Seal Inscription of Sarvavarman, Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, III, 219.
47 Kane, 4.71; Cowell and Thomas, 4.161.
48 F.E. Pargiter, Ancient Indian Historical Tradition, 109.
Historical Biographies 495
The Maukharis also initially take the simple title of śri mahā-
rāja; and at about the same time as when Prabhākaravardhana
moved to a more exalted title, the Maukhari king did likewise,
subsequent to which they seem to have split into many small ruling
families. One among these has left inscriptions in the Barabar and
Nagarjuni hills which have a curious historical continuity. Located
close together at the eastern end of the Vindhyas in south Bihar,
both these hills have cave shrines and cells initially donated by the
Mauryas. The Maukhari inscriptions are located at the entrance to
each cave and record the placing of icons: of Kṛṣṇa in the Barabar
hill cave, and of Śiva in the Nagarjuni hill cave. There is no refer-
ence to either of the earlier votive inscriptions, still visible, nor
of the Ājīvika or other sects which would have been the earlier
occupants. Nevetheless, the sites obviously remained sacred from
past times and were re-used by the later sects of Vaiṣṇavas and
Śaivas. Whether the earlier sects were forcibly expelled or their
cells fell into disuse remains an open question. At some point an
attempt was made to try and obliterate the name of the original
donee, but not very successfully. The Maukhari kingdom extended
to the region of Kālañjara in Bundelkhand.49 Therefore, the search
for Rājyaśrī in that direction by Harṣa would have been expected.
These families were ex-feudatories of the Guptas, and there -
fore Harṣa was battling among equals—all the more reason for
Bāṇa to elevate his status. They were rivals but linked by marriage
alliances and defined by their ambitions of establishing substantial
kingdoms.
The Āryamañjuśrīmūlakalpa, of a slightly later period, nar-
rates the history essentially of eastern India over a few centuries.
It refers to the vaiśya dynasty of Śrīkaṇṭha-Sthānvīśvara and
describes it as a family of wealthy men who became ministers
and then kings. If the reading of Soma as Śaśāṅka is correct (as it
appears to be), then we are told that he was a brāhmaṇa extremely
hostile to the Buddhists and Jainas, although he is also describ-
ed as a hero.50 Reference is made to Ra (Rājyavardhana?), who
49 Barah Copper-Plate Inscriptions of Bhojadeva, Ep. Ind., 19, 15ff.
50 Āryamañjuśrīmūlakalpa; K.P. Jayaswal (ed. and trans.), An Imperial His-
tory of India, vv. 715–23.
496 The Past Before Us
was a vaiśya and a Buddhist and opposed to Soma, as was Ra’s
younger brother Ha (Harṣa?), the latter having attacked Soma at
his capital at Puṇḍra. There is a hint that the two brothers made
a joint attack. Other contemporary dynasties mentioned include
the kings of Valabhī, the Later Guptas, the Maukharis, and so on.
The east remains in a state of anarchy after Soma’s death. The
succession of rulers includes some vaiśyas who, on occasion, take
on kṣatriya status. Among them a śūdra king of Gauḍa is said to
have attacked the dvijāti-gaṇa-sāmantas, a group of upper-caste
feudatories. Rulers referred to as Gopālas are said to be of low
caste—dāsajīvinaih—and hostile to the brāhmaṇas. The brevity
of reference is tantalizing, given the social significance of the
statements made. Uncertainty in eastern India continues until the
reign of Gopālaka (Gopāla of the Pāla dynasty?), whose positive
image includes the fact that he was a patron of the Buddhists as
well as the Deva religion, i.e. Brahmanism.
Bāṇa’s biography became an exemplar among caritas and the
subject of commentaries. The carita form is discussed or referred
to in major studies on literary criticism by Ānandavardhana,
Bhoja, and Kṣemendra, from the tenth to the twelfth centuries.
Authors who fancied themselves as writing to record the activities
of kings either quote from Bāṇa or claim to be the “new Bāṇas”.
B. THE RĀMACARITA
OF SANDHYĀKARANANDIN
A biography of another kind, the Rāmacarita, was written by
Sandhyākaranandin in the early twelfth century.51 Different in
content and form from the Harṣacarita, its context is the Pāla
kingdom of eastern India, its focus on an event in the reign of
the king Rāmapāla. The event is the political and military effort
51 The Rāmacaritam of Sandhyākaranandin, edited with Sanskrit Com-
mentaries and English Translation, by R.C. Majumdar, R. Basak, and N.B.
Banerji; Haraprasad Sastri (ed.), Rāmacarita by Sandhyākara Nandi, ed. Hara-
prasad Sastri, Memoirs of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, 3.1–56; Rāmacarita of
Sandhyākaranandin, Revised with English Translation and Notes, by R. Basak,
Memoirs of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, 3.1; S. Brocquet, La Geste de Rāma:
poeme a double sens de Sandhyākaranandin.
Historical Biographies 497
made by Rāmapāla to successfully recover the region of Varendrī,
the heartland of Pāla power, which had been lost to the Kaivartas
through the mismanagement of Rāmapāla’s elder brother. The
Kaivartas were the feudatories who as intermediaries had led a
revolt against the Pālas. Composed in the reign of his successor,
Madanapāla, the biography focuses on this event, but narrates
Rāmapāla’s life from his becoming king to his voluntary death.
It is a literary tour de force because it can be read as a biography
of Rāmapāla, as well as the story of Rāma from the Rāmāyaṇa.
Narrating two distinctly different stories within the same text was
rare, but it was also a known demonstration of linguistic erudition.
Sandhyākaranandin states his familiarity with literary concepts
such as rasa, rūpaka, dhvani, and śleṣa,52 writing that involves
equivocation, punning, and double meanings.
The two stories in the Rāmacarita focus on the recovery of
Varendrī, referred to as janakabhū. In one reading it refers to
the homeland of the Pālas, and in the other it is a synonym for
Sītā—and by extension could refer to Bhū, the earth-goddess.
The recovery of the territory/Sītā seems to be a variation on the
theme of acquiring Śrī. The intermeshing of the two stories sug-
gests that Rāmapāla is being compared with Nārāyaṇa/Viṣṇu.53
The projection of the two hero figures in the context of monarchy,
the complexities of patriliny and primogeniture, and the idea of
royal divinity run parallel. Using the same text to provide a double
meaning was a demonstration of skill, but also a somewhat trite
literary exercise.
The text is inevitably complicated and a commentary was
thought necessary to explain the sometimes unusual use of words
and imagery. A commentary exists for the earlier part of the text
(ch. 1 and ch. 2, vv. 1–35) written by Śīlacandra, and focuses on
Rāmapāla, but the precise date of the commentary is not known.
Was a bifurcation intended where the commentary conveyed the
history whereas the text incorporated the poem? The name of the
commentator and the opening invocation suggest that he might
52 A.B. Keith, A History of Sanskrit Literature, 137–9. The Rāghavapāṇḍavīya,
for example, tells the stories of the Rāmāyaṇa and the Mahābhārata simultane-
ously. Rāmacaritam of Sandhyākaranandin, ed. R. Basak.
53 4.28; 5.6–8.
498 The Past Before Us
have been a Buddhist.54 The Pālas were patrons of Buddhism as
well, and the early king Dharmapāla is particularly remembered
as such.
1. Sandhyākaranandin
The final chapter of the text is the kavipraśasti (in praise of the
poet), which has an immodest assessment of the merits of the
author, in part perhaps as an answer to his numerous critics.55
He states that he comes from a family of scribes, his caste being
karana (kāyastha). The story is also that of his homeland, his
family home being in a village in Varendrī, in the smaller locality
of Bṛhadvatu, which he describes as the maṇḍala-cūḍāmaṇi—the
crest jewel of the principalities of Varendrī—and near the capital
at Puṇḍhravardhana. The grant of land was probably to his father,
a sandhi-vigrahaka (minister) during the reign of Rāmapāla. The
author would have been familiar with the king’s activities and the
politics of the court at Puṇḍhravardhana. He refers to himself as
the full moon to the forest of lilies of the Nandi family!56
The author claims that, having written a version of the Rāma
story, he is the Vālmīki of the Kali age,57 a title earlier claimed by
a learned brāhmaṇa serving the Pāla kings.58 Sandhyākaranandin’s
claim appears to have been motivated by what he refers to as the
pointless criticism of those hardly in a position to judge the bio-
graphy, although admittedly such criticism helps to advertise it.
The work was kept hidden until people of learning demanded that
it be made public because it had their approval. It would seem that
the criticism might have been political. Even if there is little direct
reference to this, the text had a political value.59 It was composed
during the reign of Rāmapāla’s son Madanapāla and inevitably
carries another eulogy, although more limited, of his immediate
patron. The author is therefore writing not about contemporary
54 The Rāmacaritam of Sandhyākaranandin, edited with Sanskrit Commentar-
ies and English Translation, Introduction, vi.
55 5.1–20.
56 5.4.
57 5.11: kaliyuga rāmāyaṇam iha kavirapi kali kāla vālmīkiḥ.
58 Badal Pillar Inscription, Ep. Ind., 2, 160–7, v. 24.
59 5.12–16.
Historical Biographies 499
events, as in some other biographies, but about a historical event
relating to the previous king.
2. The Narrative
The reading of the Rāma story opens with salutations to Śiva,
Sūrya, and the Ikṣvākus. The Pāla narrative is somewhat am-
biguous since it harks back to a samudra-kula, or Ocean-family
origin, but also has an association with Ikṣvāku and links to the
Solar lineage. A nāga appears, but this time as the progenitor of
the founder. Since the early and more powerful Pāla kings were
recognized patrons of Buddhism, there is also a salutation to the
images of Lokeśa and Tārā.60 Another concession is made to the
authority of Buddhist Elders when it is stated that one of them
arranged a treaty between two warring parties, the Pālas and the
Kalacuris of Central India.61 This is also stated by the Lama
Tāranātha writing at the end of the sixteenth century.62 This
might have been an instance of kapālasandhi, where peace comes
through buying off the aggressor.63 There is an interleaving of Pāla
kings who profess one religion but are patrons of other religions
as well, as is evident from their inscriptions.64
Other sources refer to Gopāla as the founder of the dynasty,
and to his being elected to kingship with the blessings of the god-
dess Caṇḍi. This was to avoid a condition of mātsyanyāya, the
anarchy that results from the absence of kingship. Was Caṇḍi an
alternative for Śrī? The link with the goddess probably disguised
Gopāla’s possible low origin and his election to kingship. The
biography does not refer to this; since the author claimed that the
60 3.7.
61 If it can be argued, as I have done in Chapter 4, that the Cedis were the
enemies of Kosala and are pilloried in Vālmīki’s Rāmāyaṇa as rākṣasas, then
this gives another layer of interpretation to the Rāmacarita being the story of
both Rāmapāla and Rāma. The Kalacuris being Cedis would be seen as enemies,
apart from the actual hostilities between the two.
62 Tāranātha, History of Buddhism in India, ch. 28ff./257ff.
63 The Rāmacaritam of Sandhyākaranandin, edited with Sanskrit Commentar-
ies and English Translation, Introduction.
64 The Bangarh Grant of Mahipala, Ep. Ind., 14, 324; Belwa Plates, Ep. Ind.,
29.1ff.
500 The Past Before Us
Pālas were of high status,65 his work conveniently leaves out the
more obscure early rulers. The marriage of Dharmapāla with a
Rāṣṭrakūṭa princess was both a political alliance and an acquisi-
tion of status.66
Events leading up to the loss of Varendrī are narrated briefly.
This was a major crisis in an otherwise not uncommon situation
where the Pāla hold was tenuous, with territory being lost and
recovered.67 Rāmapāla’s eldest brother, Mahipāla, suspecting
his two younger brothers of conspiring against him, imprisoned
them, but then faced a revolt of his feudatories.68 He lost the battle
against them and fled from Varendrī, which was occupied by the
Kaivartas under their victorious chief Divya/Divokka, succeed-
ed later by Bhīma. The loss is explained as being due both to
durnaya (wrong policy), and yuddha-vyāsana (obsession with
war). Possibly, the ministers were disgruntled by the policies of
the Pāla king. The revolt is described as a calamity, against the
norms—dharma-viplava—and essentially a rebellion of feudato-
ries.69 It has been argued that this was not the sole revolt and that
others also occurred in eastern India. 70 The death of Mahipāla
and the accession of the younger brother, Rāmapāla, introduced
the other theme common to biographies—the breaking of primo-
geniture and the need for a biography to justify it. Much is made
of the imprisonment of Rāmapāla by his elder brother.71
Divya is described as a highly placed officer, a royal servitor, but
constantly fraudulent.72 The epithet used, dasyu, has led to varied
readings. Some would argue that it means an enemy, others that he
was a member of an oppressed section of society. The Kaivartas
65 1.4ff.
66 Monghyr Copper-Plate Inscriptions, R. Mukherjee and S.H. Maity, Corpus
of Bengal Inscriptions, 117, 122.
67 Baghaura Narayana Image Inscription, Ep. Ind., 17.353ff.
68 The revolt is also referred to in inscriptions, e.g. Copper Plate Grant of
Vaidyadeva, king of Kamarupa, Ep. Ind., 2.347ff., vv. 13–14. Some verses of
the inscription hint at knowing the Rāmacarita, v. 4.
69 Rāmacarita, 1.24–31.
70 R.C. Majumdar, “The Revolt of Divokka Against Mahipāla II and Other
Revolts in Bengal”, 125ff.
71 Rāmacarita, 1.22–36.
72 Ibid., 1.38.
Historical Biographies 501
were of a mixed caste and occupationally said to be fishermen.73
Unfortunately, inscriptional references to Divya do not clarify
his identity.74 Rāmapāla’s successful attempt at recovering the
lost homeland involved a battle against Bhīma. In spite of their
oppressive taxation, the Kaivartas had an inadequate army. Their
auxiliary army hastily put together after the initial defeat drew on
ill-equipped peasants and local people as an armed force riding
buffaloes and using bows and arrows—kāsara-vāhanaka-bala.75
This has led to a reading of the event as a peasant revolt—perhaps
the first in Indian history.76 If that is what it was, there is surpris-
ingly no comment from the author on what must have been a most
unusual confrontation. A more feasible reading is that it was of
lesser feudatories led by the Kaivartas, making a bid to establish
their own independent authority,77 in which case it would not
have been an unusual event.
Rāmapāla was able to organize a force through various alli-
ances with neighbours and feudatories, and, by offering land and
wealth in addition, won them over together with their armies.78
The author includes a list and explains who they were. None
were rulers of consequence and both the revolt and its quelling
involved the politics of sāmantas rather than that of kings. The
place names associated with them tend to be forested areas and
administrative districts—aṭavi, bhukti, maṇḍala; and one person is
described as aṭavika-sāmanta-cūḍāmaṇi—literally, the crest jewel
73 A.M. Chowdhury, Dynastic History of Bengal, 105–7; N. Ray, History of
the Bengali People (Ancient Period).
74 Copper-Plate Grant of Bhojavarman, D.R. Bhandarkar, Inscriptions of
Bengal, 3, 22.
75 Rāmacarita, 2.42.
76 R.S. Sharma, Indian Feudalism, 220ff. Curiously, the terms generally used
for peasants, such as kīnāśa, or derivatives of kṛṣi such as kṛṣivāla, are not used
and those in revolt are referred to as the Kaivarta, presumably a clan before
they became a caste. One view reads an inscription as referring to them being
feudatories of low caste and of a dāsa family which rose to ministerial status.
But this view has been contested. Bhaturiya Inscription, Ep. Ind., 33, 150–4.
S.P. Lahiry, “Bhaturiya Inscription of Rājyapāla”, Indian Historical Quarterly,
1955, 31, 215–31.
77 K. Chakrabarti, “Brahmanical Hegemony and the Oppressed Social
Groups: The Kaivarta ‘Revolt’ and After” (forthcoming).
78 Rāmacarita, 1.43–5; 2.2–6.
502 The Past Before Us
of the forest feudatories. The circles of kings come into operation
through alliances, his major ally being his maternal uncle. This
section reads like a vignette of the peer group of a family, with one
among them trying desperately to maintain a position superior to
the intermediaries. The loss of Varendrī was a blow to the Pālas,
and its recovery was crucial.
The battle against Bhīma was fierce and is described at length.
Those that resisted were eventually won over by promises of
wealth. Some of the wealth came readily from the plunder of
Bhīma’s skandhāvāra (camp) by the victorious army, the conse-
quential act in virtually every campaign.79 The recovery of Varendrī
was sealed by establishing the city of Rāmāvatī, the description of
which echoes that of Laṅkā in the Rāmāyaṇa.80 Lengthy passages
speak of the natural beauty and fertility of Varendrī. These seem
more an exercise in poetry than as fulfilling the requirements of
a biography. The earlier oppressive taxation—krūra-kara-pīḍitā—
was replaced by a mild taxation. At various times Rāmapāla was
involved in campaigns against the Gāhaḍvālas in Varanasi, the
eastern Gaṅgas in Orissa, the Karṇāṭas from the Deccan, and the
Colas from further south. The last is mentioned in Cola sources.
An interesting aside in a play, Candikauśika by Ārya Kṣemeśvara,
states that Rāmapāla destroyed the Karṇāṭas in the same way as
Candragupta Maurya destroyed the Nandas. Would this reflect a
reading of the Mudrārākṣasa?
Since Rāmapāla is said to have ruled righteously, it was in-
evitable that his reign would be characterized by an absence of
drought, and with much rain ensuring plentiful crops. Deeply
moved by the voluntary death by drowning of his maternal
uncle, Rāmapāla follows suit.81 Madanapāla, as the new patron
of the author, receives a fulsome eulogy befitting the successor
of Rāmapāla.82 The later part of the text suggests troubles over
succession and aggression from neighbouring powers, but asserts
that the reign of Rāmapāla was a high point in Pala history.
79 Rāmacarita, 2.29–34.
80 3.31ff.
81 4.9ff.
82 4.16–21.
Historical Biographies 503
The Rāmacarita focuses on a crucial moment in the history
of the Pālas, when the later members of the dynasty, declining in
power, lost their homeland. The centrality of this event to Pāla
history is being underlined by the biographer-historian. Varendrī/
varendra-maṇḍala had been important for some centuries and was
therefore a developed region, and more strategic than the territory
to the south-east which was being gradually opened up to colo-
nization. The latter process required organized labour and effort
before the land could yield a revenue, which is why it may have
been left to intermediaries. Whereas there are references to offi-
cers in Varendrī, there are more frequent references to sāmantas
in the neighbourhood. The revolt was led by feudatories and not
by poor peasants, although the latter may have been encouraged
by the former in the possibility of discontinuing the revenue de-
mands of the paramount power, which oppressive demands had
eventually to be met by the peasants. The concentration of popu-
lation in the area may have assisted in furthering the revolt. The
successful recovery of this territory led to the re-establishment
of Pāla status. But good government had to follow. His excursus,
into the benefits that accrue to the king who follows the advice
of ministers and scribes, is a point of some interest, given that
the author himself was a scribe and the son of a minister. This
is a rather different assessment of the court than was the initial
opinion of Bāṇa. It also offers a glimpse of the complicated pro-
cess of organizing the suppression of a revolt, a picture not often
available.
If the evoking of Rāma was a compliment to Rāmapāla, it would
have been offensive to the Kaivartas and their sāmanta allies,
who were equated with the rākṣasas. Divya and Bhīma would be
thought of as Rāvaṇa. It would seem that the author’s intention was
to show the Kaivartas in poor light in order to establish the supe-
riority of the Pāla overlord, even when in dire circumstances and
facing a revolt. The problems in organizing a counter-offensive are
evident. The biography had not merely to justify the suppression
of the rebellion but also to reassert the legitimacy of Pāla control
over Varendrī. Rāmapāla was to be projected as the exemplar to
other kings facing similar opposition. The revolt of intermediaries
was not a rare occurrence in those times.
504 The Past Before Us
After his victory, Rāmapāla developed Varendrī economically
and established the rule of law. Curiously, if Varendrī had once
been under Pāla rule prior to the Kaivarta revolt, surely good
government should have been familiar to its people. The paral-
lel reading of the two themes was not just an exercise in literary
gymnastics but had a historical and political function. The threads
from the epic were drawn into the contemporary narrative. The
recovery of Varendrī was historically crucial to the authority of
the Pālas in eastern India. The politics of the turnover of ruling
families destabilized kingdoms and the biography depicts a rather
different scene from that of a powerful Pāla kingdom making a bid
for empire. It competed with the Pratihāras and the Rāṣṭrakūṭas,
who also had to deal with recalcitrant intermediaries.
3. Other Sources
Epigraphic records of the Pālas provide other details of the early
Pāla rulers. In one of these, recording the bequest to a mahā-
sāmantādhipati of four villages, the ancestor referred to was
Dayita Viṣṇu, succeeded by his son Vapyata, who was in turn
succeeded by his son Gopāla.83 It is said of Gopāla that rulership
was forced on him by the people (prakṛti), who wanted to end the
condition of mātsyanyāya (anarchy) that prevailed.
Of his successor Dharmapāla, the claim was that he combined
in himself the best of the ancient heroes, was installed as king of
Kānyakubja/Kanauj (which was the focus of a struggle between
the Pālas, the Rāṣṭrakūṭas and the Pratihāras, in the late first
millenium ad), and was accepted by people such as the Bhoja,
Matsya, Madra, Kuru, Yadu, Yavana, Avanti, Gandhāra, Kīra,
and Pañcāla. These were peoples of the past, so the list is evok-
ing earlier histories. Elsewhere, the Pālas are said to have been
of the Solar line although there are assertions of their not being
kṣatriyas at all.84 Dharmapāla (as his name suggests) is described
as a devout patron of Buddhism. He is credited with having called
an assembly at Kanauj, doubtless emulating Harṣa as well as the
83 Khalimpur Copper Plate, Ep. Ind., 4.243–54.
84 R.C. Majumdar, History of Bengal, vol. I, 101. If they were kāyasthas, then
they may have thought it appropriate to have a kāyastha biographer.
Historical Biographies 505
earlier Buddhist memory of kings convoking religious assemblies.
He also takes the exalted title of parameśvara-paramabhaṭṭāraka-
mahārājādhirāja, which was perhaps necessary given the ex-
tensive hierarchy in the ranks of his feudatories and officers. Other
inscriptions give a detailed pedigree which begins with Gopāla
and continues to Mahipāla, also mentioning patrons of Buddhist
or Puranic sects.85 Later kings with the same name are some-
times differentiated by adding the suffix deva to their names, thus
Gopāla-deva and Vigrahapāla-deva would refer to Gopāla II and
Vigrahapāla II.86 Some inscriptions have a Buddhist invocation
and are therefore different in style from those with invocations to
Śiva or Viṣṇu, even if the grant recorded is to a brāhmaṇa.
Dedicatory inscriptions on icons, many of which were Buddh-
ist, were isued by Rāmapāla and Madanapāla. A retrospective ins -
cription of the reign of Madanapāla records a grant of land to a
brāhmaṇa who recited the Mahābhārata to the queen. It gives the
descent list of the Pāla kings with a brief comment on each. There
is little on the Kaivarta revolt, although Divya is mentioned. Had
the revolt now become a matter of little consequence?87 Another
inscription refers to an earlier reverse suffered by a Pāla king who
had to retreat to the southern territory of this kingdom, which
became the base for Pāla administration, and the northern territory
had to be reconquered.88 The Pāla hold was tenuous, given loss
and recovery more than once.
It is curious why there is no biography of Dharmapāla by a
Buddhist author. The Tibetan work of the Lama Tāranātha refers
to the Pāla dynasty as of the Sūryavaṃśa, which would make
them kṣatriyas.89 There are some cross-references to Harṣadeva,
the eleventh-century king of Kashmir, as well as to contemporary
85 Two Pala Plates from Belwa, Ep. Ind., 29, Plate B, 9ff.; Bangarh Copper-
plate, Ep. Ind., 14, 324; J. Bagchi, The History and Culture of the Pālas of Bengal
(circa 750–circa 1200), 22–6; Amgachi Inscription, Ep. Ind., 15, 293–301.
86 Belwa Plates, Ep. Ind., 29, 1–9.
87 S. Brocquet, La Geste de Rāma: poeme a double sens de Sandhyākaranandin,
45ff.; J. Bagchi, The History and Culture of the Pālas of Bengal (circa 750–circa
1200), 22–6.
88 The Baghaura Narayana Image Inscription, Ep. Ind., 17, no. 4, 353.
89 Tāranātha, History of Buddhism in India, trans. Lama Chimpa and A.
Chattopadhyaya, chs 26–33, folio 123Aff.
506 The Past Before Us
kings of Tibet, and to Elders of the Buddhist Saṅgha. The Pāla
kings are identified with the monasteries which they either cons-
tructed or restored. The section on Dharmapāla includes details of
the teachers at various monasteries, which was again an attempt
to correlate the history of the dynasty with that of the Saṅgha.
A rather garbled version of the Kaivarta revolt is narrated. Both
the Bhangala and the Turuṣka waged war and were subdued by
Mahipāla and his maternal uncle Canaka. Perhaps by this time the
term Turuṣka, originally referring to people from Central Asia,
was sometimes being used for those seen as adverse or alien, and
therefore in popular memory the Kaivartas were seen as Turuṣkas,
i.e. those who are in opposition, which would have been a histori-
cally curious transposition of the name.
The writing of royal biographies was not just a fashion of the
courts, it was a political necessity. Beginning with compositions in
Sanskrit and occasionally Prākrit, such works were later written
in the regional languages. The format was similar but the idiom
was that of local politics. There were few such biographies from
Buddhist authors. Harṣa was not a Buddhist—unlike Aśoka. The
Jainas maintained biographical notes on their Elders and the suc-
cession of the major pontiffs.
The biographies summarized here conform to the format of the
carita but their intentions vary. The Harṣacarita is in many ways
the most intellectually provocative. It spans various contexts and
questions some of the assumptions of a carita, making it thereby
more of a historical document than just a literary form. It touches
on facets that were significant to the formulation of the new genres
that went into the making of the historical traditions from the
seventh century onwards. The Rāmacarita, which ostensibly is
an exercise in playing with language, actually has a perspective
on a historical event of much consequence. Under the veneer of a
eulogy on a king, there is much on the crucial relationship between
the king and his feudatories and intermediaries, especially in a
situation where the politics of opposition is made apparent. The
new genres of biographies, inscriptional annals, and chronolo-
gies, legitimate in themselves as depicting a period of history,
can perhaps be better understood if also viewed in the changing
historical context from the mid-first millennium ad.
13
Biographies as Histories
1. Towards Historical Writing
The three new genres narrating the history of persons and
events that became current in the post-Gupta period were
biographies of kings, official inscriptions, and chronicles
of region or dynasty. These were more recognizably historical than
the earlier ones, barring the Buddhist. This transition dates to post-
Gupta times and has some echoes from Sramanic historiography
and Puranic sources. Sandhyākaranandin may not mention the
sources he consulted, but as a man of learning it can be assum-
ed that he would have read the Āryamañjuśrīmūlakalpa, among
others. Despite ideological differences, there would have been
some mutual interchange, at least among the literati.
To place this change towards historical writing in context, it might
be helpful to take an overview of its background. Drawn from the
biographies, such a survey would also be pertinent to the study
of inscriptions and chronicles.1 Although the three forms differ,
they emerge from similar historical contexts and are closely tied
to the mainstream culture of royal courts; and their authors come
from a common cultural matrix. There is therefore some overlap
in their content.
The genre of historical biography developed in the period from
the seventh century ad. These caritas are initially the literature
of the royal court and could emerge only when the court became
hegemonic, governed by codes specific to its functioning.2 The
1 These will be discussed in the subsequent chapters.
2 Daud Ali, Courtly Culture and Political Life in Early Medieval India.
508 The Past Before Us
focal point of administration remained the court, but now also
emphasizing a different style of functioning from before. Forms
of address, manners, and body language became social indicators
and clues to levels of relationships. Some terms from earlier times
continued, as for example digvijaya, but the connotation changes.
Resort to past usage suggests continuity but the metaphors used
may disguise the change. Sandhyākaranandin, in using the story
of Rāma, draws attention to a symbol of ideal kingship extended
to the actual king, and the association of deity with the king has
a literary precedent in the Rāmāyaṇa.
Historical biography focusing on the king points to his cen-
trality as one whose authority had to be reiterated. The narrative
frequently centres on a key event, viewed as crucial to the king’s
authority, and on sequential events. Caritas were not intended as
critical history but as making a statement about a particular king
and his concerns. Although viewed essentially as literature, their
being related to the exercise of power emphasized their claim
to pre senting contemporary events as they actually happened—
but not excluding the past which was necessary to their present-
ation.
The focus in carita literature was on a person rather than a
lineage or a pedigree, and the family replaced the clan. Individual
achievement and abilities were more important to status than only
to lineage. The contrast can be seen in the vaṃśānucarita of the
Purāṇa, which had dismissed such rulers with the mere mention of
a name in a king-list, but now the caritas expand on the activities
of some. The choice is significant to the tradition and the times.
The earlier dismissive attitude was partially because many rulers
were patrons of non-brahmanical sects. In the new situation of
competition, with relatively equal opportunities for those compet-
ing, the successful had to single out their patron for praise.
2. The Authors
These compositions are no longer anonymous, or of attributed
authorship. The authors are named and their credibility established
through a brief autobiographical sketch, which was a contrast to
the attributed or unknown authorship of the epics and Purāṇas.
Biographies as Histories 509
Appending an appropriate biography of the author was another
means of legitimizing the subject of the biography. The author,
as Bilhaṇa puts it, provides the nectar of immortality to the king’s
body of fame when the drum of eternal departure sounds.3
Some, such as Bāṇa, claim a Bhṛgu association, emphasizing
the suggestion that the Bhṛgu brāhmaṇas were virtually the keep-
ers of the itihāsa-purāṇa tradition, and therefore the preferred
authors of such texts. The association of kāyasthas with the histori-
cal tradition is anticipated from texts and inscriptions composed
by them by the end of the first millennium ad.
Juxtaposing authorial autobiography with the subject’s bio-
graphy reinforces the idea that the choice of the author was not
arbitrary. If not actually a court poet or an officer of the court, he
came from a family closely associated with the court. As a free-
lance intellectual from a rich agrahāra, Bāṇa did not need con-
nections. Sandhyākaranandin came from a family of the upper
bureaucracy, well established and anxious to demonstrate his
learning as being comparable to that of any scholarly brāhmaṇa.
This meant that authors tended to be brāhmaṇa or kāyastha
members of the elite, whose concerns they reflected in the bio-
graphies. Pinpointing the credentials of the authors was important
in a period when the brāhmaṇa caste itself was opening up to a
variety of recruits, not all of whom were at home in brahmanical
and Sanskritic learning.4
The choice of author also reflected the likely sources that he
would consult, since few mention their sources. With Bāṇa, one
can tell what these sources were from the text and the people with
whom he kept company. Bāṇa explores various situations that give
a richer flavour to his historical account. Sandhyākaranandin,
even if he was not a brāhmaṇa, would have used court records
and epigraphs, as well as the oral tradition of the court, leaving
scope for divergent personal assessments.
The language is largely Sanskrit, which creates a degree of
uniformity and links the courts, but contemporary with this are the
3 Vikramāṅkadevacarita, 18.106.
4 B.M. Morrison, Political Centres and Culture Regions in Early Bengal;
K. Chakrabarti, Religious Process: The Purāṇas and the Making of a Religious
Tradition.
510 The Past Before Us
emerging regional languages, creating almost a two-tier linguis-
tic culture by the start of the second millennium ad. The use of
Sanskrit as the official language at the royal courts was a godsend
to educated brāhmaṇas, who migrated long distances in search of
employment and introduced their characteristic culture into new
areas at elite levels The migration was not limited to brāhmaṇas:
scribes and professional administrators were in demand and
kāyasthas also travelled.5 Following soon after came the skilled
builders and artisans to construct royal temples. This network of
migrants created an elite Sanskrit culture. The use of Sanskrit has
been described as “the Sanskrit cosmopolis”, an endorsement of
the hegemony of Sanskrit.6 Implicit in this was super-regional
use of Sanskrit through political channels, and with the language
introducing cultural forms. This contrasts with the use of regional
languages as the vernacular among those not part of the elite. In
earlier centuries, Sanskrit changed from its limited use as a ritual
language to a broader use by the literati, ultimately replacing
Prākrit, as is evident from the early inscriptions.7 The interface
of Sanskrit with a local language would have been a reality since
not all those claiming brāhmaṇa status were migrants, some be-
ing local recruits.
3. The Acquiring of Status
Highlighting the role of the king was only in part to establish his
legitimacy and that of his family. He had to claim the appropriate
caste and ancestry competing with obscure families acquiring
power. Although political power was in practice open to any
caste, there had developed an insistence on formally reiterating the
order of caste society in accordance with the Dharmaśāstras. Thus,
although in the seventh century Xuanzang writes that dynasties
5 The earliest recorded case of a scribe travelling far is that of Capaḍa, a
kharoṣṭhī-knowing scribe who was sent to Karnataka to engrave the edicts of
Aśoka in brāhmī, and who could not resist signing some of them with his name
in kharoṣṭhī. J. Bloch, Les Inscriptions d’Asoka, 151.
6 S. Pollock, “The Sanskrit Cosmopolis, 300–1300 ce: Transculturation,
Vernacularisation and the Question of Ideology”, 197–249.
7 See Chapter 7.
Biographies as Histories 511
of various castes, including śūdras, were ruling, a claim to being
kṣatriya became almost a requirement.
Alternatively, it can be argued that the claim was only made
in texts emanating from the court and that the actual caste of the
dynasty was known, suggesting an interesting dual perception of
status. If the social origins of the dynasty were challenged, the
official version could be produced to legitimate the claim, involv-
ing the harking back to what were believed to be past connec-
tions. Gradually, in this way, a new process of becoming kṣatriya
evolved, giving a new meaning to the category. Kṣatriyas were
no longer the ruling clans in a clan-based society, they were those
that claimed royal descent from earlier heroes. The context now
was kingdoms, not clans. This change had been emerging in the
pre-Gupta period, but it now became established and the claim
was significant to dynastic history.
The Viṣṇu Purāṇa makes a caustic statement reflecting the rise
of a new kṣatriya order,8 to the effect that those who have horses
and chariots will become rulers and those without will be servitors.
The Purāṇas had reiterated what they called another category of
kṣatriyas,9 claims that required shuffling caste statuses among the
newly surfacing groups. The call to observe varṇāśramadharma
became more insistent. Origin myths were linked to one of the
two kṣatriya lineages—Sūrya or Candra vaṃśa—or an equally
appropriate origin. Yet the variations in genealogical linkages sug-
gest the use of presumed genealogies and pedigrees in balancing
political factions. This could well result in contradictory affilia-
tions for the same dynasty, but kṣatriya status remained central.
This was governed by the point in time at which the origin myth
gives way to a historically attested genealogy, marking a change
in the political status of a dynasty.
Puṣyabhūti has to perform a Tantric ritual of seemingly Drāviḍa
origin, somewhat curious for the founder of the principality of
Thanesar in northern India, except that by now such rituals had
probably become fairly widespread. Possibly astrology, alchemy,
8 6.1.35.
9 F.E. Pargiter, Dynasties of the Kali Age, 53: . . . utsādayitvā kṣatram tu
kṣatram anyat kariṣyati . . .
512 The Past Before Us
and rituals claiming to be based on magic were seen as more
efficacious than the conventional Vedic ones. Were the siddhas
holding out larger promises than the śrotriya brāhmaṇas?
Marriage into a family of high status was crucial, for such mar-
riages would endorse claims to land, political power, and to further
alliances. The svayamvara was acceptable to patriarchal norms
because the assumption was that the woman was being gifted in
marriage, even if the ritual had built into it the pretence that she
was choosing. This ritual too underlines the role of the kṣatriya
as the pre-eminent giver of gifts. Where the bride was of a higher
status, it helped to cover up the social discrepancy by saying that
she chose her husband, even if the choice was a subversion of
caste rules. The early Pāla rulers of somewhat ambiguous status
are not mentioned in the Rāmacarita, the list effectively starting
with Dharmapāla, who takes royal titles, but the marriage alliance
with the Rāṣṭrakūṭas is mentioned. Its political function is apparent
from the statement that a cousin on the Rāṣṭrakūṭa side led the
first attack on the Kaivartas.
The gifting of a daughter was considered righteous and sug-
gested the gifting of Śrī/Fortune and Bhū/Earth. This was not a
literal possession of land but symbolic of the Earth accepting the
lord, recalling the story of Pṛthivī naming herself after Pṛthu. In
the Rāmacarita the symbolism of the acquisition of Śrī is projected
back to the Rāmāyaṇa, where Sītā represented both Śrī and Bhū,
and where sovereignty is associated with the mother goddess.10
Varendrī being finally acquired by Rāmapāla was the recovery of
janakabhū, both Sītā and Śrī. This was probably also influenced by
the pervasive belief that śakti, personifying the female principle or
deity, was necessary to the fulfilment of any action. Further, male
deities had acquired female consorts whose roles did not confine
them to the wings but brought them centrestage. The centrality of
Śrī and Bhū as deities was not characteristic of the Vedic pantheon.
The mother goddess was increasingly a power to be reckoned with,
the more so among those who came not from the courtly Sanskritic
tradition but the more parochial folk tradition.
This had a bearing on two other issues, primogeniture and
10 Rāmacarita, 1.13.
Biographies as Histories 513
colateral succession; both are brought into royal biographies. In
genealogical constructions, colateral lines could be suppressed—
as in the case of the Sūryavaṃśa. Interregna can be glossed over
and factions disguised. The successful contender temporarily
terminates the prowling for power among competitors. This is
not reflected in the Puranic dynastic lists. But biographies have to
justify either the withholding or the transfer of power to colateral
lines. Primogeniture and the succession of colaterals are inter-
related, since the first often marginalizes the second. The politics
of opposition hovers over many sentiments that are expressed
about the relationship between the king and his kinsmen, even if it
is not openly referred to. The intermediaries that lead the opposi-
tion tend to be described as lower castes, though not invariably.
They could as well be the distanced kinsmen of the royal family.
The concern with primogeniture varies in the biographies.
Although Bāṇa hints at Harṣa’s political ambition, it is clear that his
elder brother did rule briefly and died without an heir. Rāmapāla
needed an indirect Vaiṣṇava association, though a favour from
Śiva is also mentioned. Succession through the eldest male is
common in patriarchal societies, although the degree of adherence
will have varied. Where primogeniture is not observed, descent
can fan out beyond control.
Legitimacy of succession in the biography is expressed through
approval from various authorities, such as ministers in the case
of Harṣa. The central role of the deity in legitimating succession
is a later feature. In the Harṣacarita, the deity Śrī is a metaphor.
Could this have been in part due to the prevalence of Buddhism at
that time—even if by now Buddhism itself had conceded various
roles to deities and bodhisattvas? According to Xuanzang, it was
a bodhisattva who prompted Harṣa to accept kingship.11 Public
symbols for establishing recognition could also include starting
an era and reckoning in regnal years within the era; and winning
a bride who could be projected as a goddess. A variation on this
was Harṣa rescuing his sister, which strengthened his claim to
sovereignty.
Legitimation by ritual involved the performance of rites, but not
11 T. Watters, On Yuan Chwang’s Travels in India, 343ff.
514 The Past Before Us
as the invocation of the past. For the past was now invoked through
genealogical links and heroic paradigms, but not invariably so. The
handling of these new forms was, however, again the privilege of
the brāhmaṇas. Dynasties were linked to the earlier genealogies of
kṣatriya heroes through origin myths. The vaṃśanucarita section
of the Purāṇas therefore becomes a charter for validating these
links. Recourse to such a charter depended on the degree to which
this kind of legitimacy was sought.
With increasing gifts of land to brāhmaṇas, there was a further
diversification in brāhmaṇa activities. Some confined themselves
to the performance of rituals, or to the perpetuation of learning in
their agrahāras. Others took to more lucrative professions, such
as participating in the horse trade with the north-western regions.
Most, however, used their grants of settled land to become inter-
mediaries collecting revenue from the local peasantry; or they
colonized the large acreages granted to them in virgin lands.
Since the lands were treated as heritable, they became ancestors
to those that had emerged as ruling families in these areas. Such
families could claim that they were brahma-kṣatra, brāhmaṇas by
birth who took to professions associated with kṣatriyas.12 Battle is
seen as the metaphor for a sacrificial ritual. The mixed pedigree
introducing the brāhmaṇa connection could be claimed as a higher
kṣatriya status.
4. Gift-giving
The performance of Vedic sacrificial rituals as a mechanism of
claiming status gradually became perfunctory,13 giving way to
the great gifts or mahādānas—gifts of gold and grants of land,
made largely to brāhmaṇas. The preferred rituals now were the
hiraṇyagarbha (the king emerging from a golden womb), and the
tulāpuruṣa (the king weighed against precious metals), possibly
because the latter incorporated more recent rites and not archaic.
Bāṇa refers to a contention among the ṛṣis as to how the Vedic
mantras should be recited (a contention that continues to this day),
12 N.G. Majumdar, Inscriptions of Bengal, 44, fn. 3, and App. 192.
13 D.C. Sircar, “Some Performers of Aśvamedha”, 93ff.
Biographies as Histories 515
which might also have encouraged the preference for new rituals.
The visibility of the gift was enhanced when singled out, as was
its political meaning, now enmeshed in status and diplomacy, and
represented an indirect statement on the economy.
Gifts came as tribute, either directly from one ruler to another,
as when Bhāskaravarman sought an alliance with Harṣa; or on
special occasions, such as wedding gifts for Rājyaśrī; or in asso-
ciation with digvijayas and assemblies. Bāṇa describes the lavish
gifts bestowed on the brāhmaṇas, kings, and nobles before Harṣa
set out on his digvijaya.14
The changing forms of gift-giving point to historical change.
Wealth as always was linked to status, but the nature of the wealth
and the mechanism of the display had changed. Cattle and horses
gave way to land, but gold was constant. (Given that gold was not
easily available in India, the exaggerated descriptions were more
likely fantasies of desire.) The major distribution of wealth was in
the form of land grants. Land, whether virgin or cultivated, brought
an income to the donee and was a loss of potential income to the
donor.
The noticeable change from earlier times was that land, being
immovable, was a permanent donation. Although initially only the
revenue was granted to a specific person, it soon became heritable
private property, and the foundation for the accumulation of wealth
and authority by the grantee, who could use it to build political
power. Land donated to the Saṅgha could never play this role,
since it was neither private property nor heritable by a family.
It could build the political strength of the Saṅgha, but only as a
Buddhist institution. For brāhmaṇa grantees, by contrast, such
land could be exploited for an immense political and economic
potential, invaluable both personally and as a caste identity.
Gift-giving, tied into the hierarchy of rank and status, ack-
nowl edged lesser persons, and was thus on occasion the reverse
of tribute. Bāṇa mentions a range of ranks—rājā, mahārāja,
bhū pāla, pārthiva, kṣitipāla, kumāra, lokapāla, nṛpati, narapati,
etc. Sāmantas and mahāsāmantas could be further elevated by
the suffix mahārāja. Grandiose titles are reserved for the patron
14 Kane, 7.108–9; Cowell and Thomas, 7.226–7.
516 The Past Before Us
who is, at a minimum, the parameśvara-parama-bhaṭṭāraka-
mahārājādhirāja. Sometimes the victor provides such a title for
the defeated king so that his own status is further enhanced, as was
said of Pulakeśin II, who held back the powerful Harṣa.15 These
were among the codes and modalities of the royal court.
But perhaps the most interesting discussion of gift-giving is by
Xuanzang and his biographers, suggesting a deliberate recalling of
a past narrative—although this is not specifically said. It describes
the quinquennial assemblies held by Harṣa, two of which were
at Kanauj and Prayāga. The distribution of wealth from the royal
treasury was such that finally Harṣa was left with just a worn-out
coat given him by his sister. At Prayāga the gifts were redeemed
by the kings present and given to the treasury, only to be distri-
buted at a later point.16 This is a Buddhist view of Harṣa and seems
to draw on earlier texts depicting ideal rulers.
Harṣa being left with nothing but an old coat is a little too close
to the story in the Aśokāvadāna of Aśoka being left with half an
āmalaka fruit to give to a monk on his alms round. Xuanzang
would have known the earlier story and its implications. He was
evoking these from earlier Buddhist writing to point out the
mutual interdependence of the Saṅgha and the king. The descrip-
tions are neither factually precise nor perhaps meant to be. If
the distribution was as narrated, the regular quinquennial deple -
tion of the treasury would have created serious fiscal problems.
Extraordinary displays of wealth and gift-giving carry hints of the
earlier potlatch with its display, consumption, distribution, and
destruction of wealth. This was the dāna-stuti being superseded
by the praśasti, the coming into being of new ways of displaying
wealth in a courtly culture.
There is a reminder also of the role of assemblies in the forg-
ing of the Buddhist doctrine, particularly when it is the Hīnayāna
Buddhists at the Kanauj assembly opposed to the Mahāyāna
Buddhists, with Harṣa ruling in favour of the latter. This recalls
the decision of the Schism Edict of Aśoka, and the description in
the Sri Lankan chronicles of his role at the Council of Pāṭaliputra
supporting the Theravāda.
15 The Aihole Inscription, Ep. Ind., 6.6ff.
16 Si-yu-ki: Buddhist Records of the Western World, 5, 233–4, 214ff.
Biographies as Histories 517
At least two features drew on earlier forms but restructured
them to suit the new form of kingship. The traditional digvijaya
as part of the rhetoric of kingship was extended to skirmishes and
raids, and could be poeticized to include campaigns. But conquest
held meanings other than the obvious. War symbolizes collecting
wealth through booty, or through the settling of conquered lands
which later yield revenue. Booty captured in a campaign, and the
ensuing pillage and plunder, are reviewed.17 Bāṇa’s references
to poverty as well as the cynical remarks of peasants about the
unpleasantness of the king’s digvijaya, and even some reported
questioning of the king as the upholder of dharma, point to a
reversal of fulsome praise.18
Royal orders, including grants, could be issued from the
skandhāv āra.19 Constant feuding meant armies on the march with
court being held in such military camps. The Harṣacarita depicts
the camp as virtually a temporary capital, allowing the inspection
of outlying regions and the administration of feudatories, which
brought the king in touch with local persons and matters. Courtly
culture now moves into new areas. Earlier forms were ostensibly
evoked, but their meanings had changed and the new definitions
were of greater import.
Marriage alliances were politically important, but with Harṣa
the central position remained that of his sister—if Xuanzang is to
be believed. He depicts brother and sister acting jointly in affairs
of state, reminiscent of Buddhist origin myths.
5. The Cakravartin
Conquest alone does not make a universal monarch; the associa-
tion of good fortune is through the goddess, Śrī. This, in theory
had been exercised through claims to conquest and is now repre-
sented in the biographies as the favour of the deity. Śrī blesses his
ancestor and is personified as Harṣa’s sister Rājyaśrī. Viṣṇu, in his
incarnation as Rāma, by implication bestows favour on Rāmapāla.
Conquest, necessary to the brahmanical image of a cakravartin, is
being replaced by bhakti and devotion to the deity.
17 Kane, 7.122; Cowell and Thomas, 7.254.
18 Cowell and Thomas, 7.207–9.
19 E.g., the Bangarh Inscription, Ep. Ind., 14.324ff.
518 The Past Before Us
Tantric sects were the substratum religion for many centuries,
and their visibility begins to surface from the early first millen-
nium ad. Since this belief was rooted in the populace and not
imposed from above, its appropriation by the ruling caste is a con-
cession to the practices of its subjects, and the creation of an
identity not limited to the norms of the elite. Or alternatively
the social origins of many ruling families being “obscure”, such
families would have elevated their cult observances into elite
practices when they became ruling families. The Tantric rites of
Harṣa’s ancestor suggest this, whereas Harṣa performs the rites of
gift-giving in forms that are Buddhist and Śaiva.
Ultimate power was with the cakravartin, the king who was
above the need for alliances, supreme among competitors. In
Buddhist and Jaina thought the cakravartin upheld the moral
order, cutting across clan, caste, and other identities, and to that
extent even undermining the kṣatriya ethic of earlier times. The
Bhagavad-Gītā upholding the ethic of the warrior was not compat-
ible with the social ethic of the Buddha. The latter did not require
the backing of priests but required the goodwill of monks, since the
king and the Saṅgha were in a relationship of mutual support.
The cakravartin of the post-Gupta period continued to be pro-
jected as a conqueror. The mention of his conquests in royal eulo-
gies was often included in a formulaic way in the larger rhetoric
of conquest. Cultural assimilation also led to the incorporation of
territory, and this could pass for conquest. The epic hero may still
have been a model and the terminology may not have changed
substantially, but the hero was now a king with grandiose titles.
Was the modification of his qualifications by bringing in the favour
of the deity a subconscious influence of the Sramanic ideal of the
cakravartin? The possibility of such influence is strengthened
by some texts actually deploring a frequency of campaigns and
pillaging.20
The stabilizing of the varṇāśramadharma is also expected from
rulers. The form, at least, should be observed, even if the actual
functioning of society was at some variance from it. Its support
20 Skanda Purāṇa, 6.48.42–4, quoted in A.B.L. Awasthi, History from the
Puranas, 153ff.
Biographies as Histories 519
of social inequality was the reverse of the Sramanic social ethic.
Caste society was introduced in areas where it did not exist. The
granting of land to brāhmaṇas and utilization of the grantees as
vanguards of state and society may have been a more effective
means of changing the social mores in these regions than the
attempt to consolidate through conquest, even if the rhetoric of
conquest prevailed. Conquest required a large financial outlay
whereas conversion to caste society, to whatever degree, was
less expensive and had the advantage of being an easier way to
subordinate labour.
The assertion of sovereignty is vague in some areas, as for
example among the forest-dwellers. They are treated as distinctly
different and inferior, but they have their own life-ways. The des-
cription of such people as rākṣasas underlines the point, the para-
digm being provided by the Rāmāyaṇa. The analogy of Rāmapāla
suppressing a revolt and Rāma destroying rākṣasa power would
have been obvious. In Bāṇa’s text, forest chiefs (aṭavika-rājās)
are largely confined to the Vindhyan region, where even aṭavika-
sāmantas (“forest feudatories”) are mentioned, a category that
goes back to earlier times.21 This was an area being encroached
upon by the monarchical state and caste society. Settlements
encroaching into forests become a form of colonization and such
colonization was justified as introducing a superior culture. The
conversion of forest-dwellers into a peasantry becomes apparent
in the description, as noted earlier, of the Vindhyan forest in the
Harṣacarita. Deities and rituals of the forest-dwellers or even the
local population were incorporated into Puranic cults, wherever
acculturation was called for. The pulls of local belief at various
levels resulted in the creation of amalgamated religious forms.
6. The Theory of Maṇḍala
The notion of the cakravartin as the paramount ruler became
a more pertinent idea with increasing numbers of kingdoms
and their interface, captured in the political theory of maṇḍala.
Although referred to in earlier texts, the political economy of
post-Gupta times provided a greater political reality for the theory
21 Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, III, 7ff.
520 The Past Before Us
and of its practice on more occasions. The word had many mean-
ings: a circle which demarcates an area from its surroundings,
therefore a sanctified area, and by extension temples and stūpas
seen as maṇḍalas in stone; a geometrical design involving a circle
enclosing squares and triangles in infinite patterns, said to be
conducive to meditation; an administrative analogy referring to a
group of villages and subsequently to a larger area of territory, of-
ten an administrative unit which was administered by a maṇḍaleśa
(officer in charge of the maṇḍala), one of the ranks in the hierarchy
of intermediaries.22
As a formulation in political theory it referred to a circle of
terri tories held by intermediaries or independent rulers and the
relations between them. Each king desirous of victory (vijigīṣu)
was ringed around by allies and enemies. Those on the outer fringe
were viewed as potential enemies who had either to be wooed or
conquered, as evident from Harṣa’s relations with Bhāskaravarman
and Śaśāṅka. The sāmantas could become the counterpoint to the
power of the king—as happened with Rāmapāla. Politics was a
competition for supremacy, with the balance shifting after each
major campaign or with the politics of conciliation.
The theory has a pattern in delineating allies and enemies.
At the centre of the maṇḍala (circle) was the vijigīṣu—the king
desirous of conquering the four quarters.23 Facing him are catego-
ries of enemies and friends: the ari (the enemy), then the mitra
(the friend), and further out the ari-mitra, the mitra-mitra, and the
ari-mitra-mitra. Behind him are the pārṣṇi-grāha—literally the
heel-grabber; the ākranda or friend, the pārṣṇi-grāha-sāra (the
friend of the heel-grabber), and the ākrandā-sāra (the friend of
the friend). There were two negotiators: the mādhyama, close
to both the king desirous of victory and to his enemy; and the
udāsina, the one who was at a distance from all these and therefore
neutral. The categories are described in greater detail.
The alliances and the conquests of the vijigīṣu kept the system
going. Relationships were seen in a circular framework. At the
same time, there were bilateral relationships between the vijigīṣu
22 B.N.S. Yadav, Society and Culture in Northern India in the Twelfth Century;
D.N. Jha (ed.), The Feudal Order, 78ff.
23 Arthaśāstra, 6.2.13–23.
Biographies as Histories 521
and his adversary from within the circle. Policies were determined
by alliances, wars, simulations of war, neutrality, bribes, the cre-
ation of factions among the enemy, dependence, or simultaneous
moves towards war and peace. Some of these are ostensibly non-
violent, control being exercised through a mix of coercion and
concession. This was a contrast to the style both of biographies
and inscriptions, where the resort to violence is often represented
as a quick solution.
The digvijaya could consist of campaigns or even of raids
and pillage, but also merely a ceremonial procession.24 It was
synonymous with the acquisition of new resources: through
booty, revenue from colonized lands, and the use of prisoners of
war used as labour. Civil and military functions could overlap
and successful military activities would enhance prestige in ad-
ministrative function. War brought wealth, quite apart from the
revenue that came from taxes and judicial fines.25 The notion of
digvijaya was therefore important, even if actual conquest was
absent. The perspective was from a particular region, the view
being from the inside out as it were—from the kingdom looking
at the wider world.
The monopoly of the paramount state over the various wings
of the army, projected from earlier sources, had by now given
way to a considerably decentralized functioning, since feudatories
were required to maintain troops for their overlord. The soldiers
of the suzerain would run amok if they had won a victory, as in
the Rāmacarita when describing the destruction of the Kaivarta
camp by the soldiers of Rāmapāla.26 The peasantry appears to have
changed from being without weapons, as in Mauryan times, to
having access to some weapons. But judging by the description of
the resistance faced by Rāmapāla in the battle for Varendrī, weap-
ons could be as simple as bows and arrows. Those using them were
often peasants and locals, hastily mobilized by sāmantas against
the Pāla army, rather than soldiers trained for combat. The theory
seemingly encouraged violence, but also advocated a balancing
of relations to avoid unnecessary campaigns.
24 Ep. Ind., 5, 223 (note 5), 6, 51 (note 5).
25 Nāradasmṛti, 1.48–50.
26 Rāmacarita, 2.29.
522 The Past Before Us
7. The King’s Power
The theoretical role of cakravartins and maṇḍalas receives a dif-
ferent focus when seen in terms of the actual working of the royal
function in the context of dharma. Discussion on its meaning
varies somewhat and it is not consistent even within a single
source.27 This throws open the connotation of dharma. It is
therefore suggested that perhaps the opinions of the dvija—the
twice-born upper castes—should be final,28 endorsing the king’s
dependence on advisors.29 But this was unacceptable to those of
the view that the king’s authority has precedence over dharma.30
This issue also hinges on the ultimate source of law where the
dharma of the king incorporates ācāra—the custom and usage
of his people.
The king, in the earlier texts, is subject to banishment and
even assassination, sometimes by his subjects, if he has behaved
unethically, and sometimes by those qualified to do so.31 Mention
is made in the Harṣacarita of kings in the past who were removed
or assassinated.32 The sacrality of kingship seems less effective
than its temporal power.
The presence of intermediaries of many categories, from
aṭavika-rājās (forest chiefs) to sāmantas and maṇḍaleśvaras (land-
owning intermediaries and tributary allies), was more proximately
experienced in the countryside than the distant control by the
king. The intermediaries acted as an integrative network to sup-
port the policy of the state, or to oppose it. The cultivator had a
closer link with the intermediary than with the king. The Kaivarta
revolt was not the sole example of the weakening control of the
king, with sāmantas declaring independence. Where such revolts
succeeded, they would not have been described as revolts but as
the succession of a new family. The hierarchy in titles indicates
27 The Laws of Manu, 7.203, 8.41.
28 Āpastamba Dharmasūtra, 1.7.20.6–7.
29 The Laws of Manu, 7.54; Mahābhārata, 12.87.7.
30 Arthaśāstra, 3.1.39.
31 Saccamkira Jātaka, no. 73, Padakusulamānava Jātaka, no. 432, in The
Jātaka; Mahābhārata, 13.85.35.
32 Cowell and Thomas, 6.222–4; Kane, 6.105–6.
Biographies as Histories 523
a shift in power from sāmanta to sāmanta-rājā, mahārāja, and
eventually mahārājādhirāja. The rise of the Maukhari family
ruling in Kanauj is an example of this process.33
The chiefs of clans, when conquered by a kingdom, acquired a
feudatory status. The ambitions of the upper bureaucracy were not
met by access to power through administration, the same family
holding high office over four or five generations,34 made possible
by the absence of a system of recruitment. Lateral personal rela-
tions perhaps became more immediate than lineage links in this
office. Such groups were either local persons of status or incoming
migrant brāhmaṇas and kāyasthas familiar with administrative
functions and keeping records.
Despite the fact that the sāmanta-mahārājas could be powerful
and overthrow dynasties, the biographies suggest a distance be-
tween overlord and intermediaries. Yet underlying each example
is a subtle interplay of power in what were relationships of mutual
dependence. This is more evident in the two later texts, by which
time it would seem that the politics of the relationship had become
more apparent. Rāmapāla could not negotiate with the Kaivartas,
the revolt had to be put down.
8. The New Codes
Among the more influential and much commented upon texts was
the Nāradasmṛti, generally dated to the mid-first millennium ad
or slightly later.35 Its substantial concern is with legal proce-
dure, by now a necessary part of administration in many more
places than before, given the growth of kingdoms. It builds on the
knowledge of earlier texts. It is at times vehement in support of
the priority of the decisions of the king, although it concedes the
importance of other institutions of society. The loss of dharma in
the Kaliyuga made legal procedures necessary. The more likely
reason was that the king had now to deal with the practices of
33 Clay Seals of Nalanda, Ep. Ind., 21, 72ff.; Haraha Inscription of Isana-
varman, ibid., 14, 110ff.; Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, vol. III, 219ff.
34 Badal Pillar Inscription, Ep. Ind., 2, 160–7.
35 The Nāradasmṛti, vols I and II.
524 The Past Before Us
diverse groups, each claiming a different legality for its activi-
ties. This may be the reason why the Nāradasmṛti reiterates the
importance of documents and witnesses.36
The Nītisāra of Kāmandaka, a text on polity, draws on the late
recension of the Arthaśāstra and reflects an awareness of change.
For instance, in speaking of the requirements of good governance
it includes bhakti which, when adapted to a political idiom, refers
to the relations between king and intermediary as expressed in
some inscriptions. Both sāmantas and aṭavikas are mentioned
but the weightage is different in the earlier and later text.37 Since
sāmantas as intermediaries was a development of Gupta times, the
Arthaśāstra has little to say on them, but it comes down heavily
on the aṭavikas, their guerrilla tactics being destructive. In the
Nītisāra the sāmantas are powerful but the aṭavikas tend to be
treated as marginal.
The Nāradasmṛti and the Nītisāra are not sources of history nor
written by a historian but they reflect the change in the relationship
between law and the king, as well as agencies of authority different
from what they were earlier. They demonstrate one of the argu-
ments asserted, namely that authors looked at earlier texts and,
without saying so, updated their own to contemporary conditions.
In this they parallel the writing of history in new genres of texts,
such as the biography, which also record political change.
For the Nāradasmṛti, legal proceedings come under the purview
of the kula (organizations of merchants and leading citizens), gaṇa
(organized groups), adhikṛta (chief officer or judge), and nṛpa
(king), in ascending order.38 The four feet of vyavahāra (legal
procedure) are said to be dharma, the law, custom, and the king,
and each overrules its predecessor. (The Arthaśāstra supports
the king as the final authority in law.39) Thus, rājaśāsana, or the
royal order, is final. At another place it gently contradicts the
classical Dharmaśāstras and says that custom prevails over the
Dharmaśāstra.40 This seems to have been a concession to the
36 Nāradasmṛti, 1.3.
37 Nītisāra of Kāmandaka, 14.29, 15.23.
38 Ibid., 1.7.
39 Arthaśāstra, 3.1.38.
40 Nāradasmṛti, 1.10–11.
Biographies as Histories 525
practices of local communities being currently brought into the
court culture, newly established in certain areas. The position of
the king was now hedged by new factors. If the law was under the
control of the king, his right to rule would have to resort to pre-
cedent and history—among other forms of legitimation.
However, the same section of the Nāradasmṛti also refers to the
king’s relations with a variety of corporate bodies—the nigama,
śreṇi, pūga, and vrata—whose conventions had perhaps to be ac -
cepted. This would tend to dilute the king’s absolute powers. An
attempt is therefore made to curb such bodies by stating that
activities inimical to the interests of the king and his subjects are
not permitted. Thus, they are prohibited from carrying arms, feud-
ing, and forming large confederacies. Evidently, such activities did
take place and are referred to in passing in some inscriptions. The
Kaivarta revolt is better known, being central to a royal biography.
The prohibition could only be effective if the king was an astute
ruler. As a final touch, it is said that actions contrary to the śāstras
should not be permitted. This could have involved interpreting
afresh the texts relating to past precedents.
That the king protects the varṇāśramadharma is repeated, and
the king is expected not to act against the accepted norms.41 Castes
should honour their established functions, for if they do not the
strong will roast the weak like fish on a skewer.42 Despite this in-
sistence, new castes are established, as for example the kāyastha,
a powerful component of the upper bureaucracy irrespective of its
ambiguous origin as given in the Dharmaśāstras. The brāhmaṇas
too break the restrictions on their prescribed occupations to be-
come civil and military administrators and traders. Caste could be
used as a focus to bind groups into social categories convenient
for state functioning, and could be bonded afresh if need be. Few
castes have an actual history of continuity from early times.
A section of the text deals with the rules governing the king’s
handling of the pāṣaṇḍas (heretical sects), or those said to preach
fraudulent doctrines. The pāṣaṇḍas are generally regarded with
contempt by brāhmaṇa authors. Their inclusion here may point to
41 Ibid., 18.5–9.
42 Ibid., 18.14–16.
526 The Past Before Us
a more vocal contestation with brahmanical views by other groups.
Both jātis and religious sects multiplied among conservative and
heretical communities. The consciousness of sectarian identity,
encouraged by Puranic and Sramanic religion, is more evident,
and this brings with it competition among the sects. The range of
sectarian views reflected in the hermitage of Divākaramitra, as
listed in the Harṣacarita, included many such pāṣaṇḍas. It should
also not be forgotten that for Xuanzang as a good Buddhist, and
for the Jainas, the heretics were the brāhmaṇas.
The power of the king lies in his edict, for he can change the
earlier decisions of kings with which he would have been familiar
from court records. A statement often repeated in such texts is
that the king’s revenue comes from his claim to the saḍbhāga—or
one-sixth of the produce—to which he is entitled in return for pro -
tecting the subjects. What emerges from this is that despite the
rhetoric of conquest and dominance, kingship was a system in
which the king had to negotiate control over a variety of groups
rather than assert unilateral authority. It is interesting that the
Nāradasmṛti does not endorse conquest as the sole stamp of a
superior king.
The acculturation to Sanskritic culture was not limited to lan-
guage but included associated mores, beliefs, and institutions. The
degree of accommodation between local and Sanskritic culture
varied. The post-Gupta state did not uproot local authority but
preferred to work through it.
9. Revenue and Grants
A decline in urban activity and commerce was a brief interlude
before it picked up again. The similarity of the economic pattern
over a large area accelerated the commercial economy in terms
of more routes and exchange centres. The latter would be places
where agrarian produce would be exchanged for artisanal goods
and the use of the standard currency of drammas and gadhaiyas
often of billon, a debased metal.43
Stratification would have had to recognize those that controlled
economic enterprise and those that laboured for it. The former
43 J. Deyell, Living Without Silver, 111.
Biographies as Histories 527
were the intermediaries, the landowners, with their rights, obliga-
tions, and dues in accordance with the grant, as well as wealthy
merchants less closely linked to the court. Those who laboured
were the cultivators, both peasants and others, paying taxes to the
intermediary of the state, and the artisans that produced the goods
traded by the merchants.
More detailed information on the changing economy and state
structure comes from inscriptions and relates largely to grants.
Agrahāras, as the name suggests, were villages and land assigned
to brāhmaṇas for their maintenance. The grantor, generally the
king, sometimes a queen or a member of the royal family, or a
sāmanta or a high official, had the right to choose who would get
what kind of grant. Members of the agrahāras therefore could
perform a dual function: they were the managers of religious and
educational institutions, and they were also a community of land-
holders. Since the agrahāra could incorporate various occupational
groups, the rights and obligations of each had to be registered.
That the administration of an agrahāra was considerable is
evident from the revenues and dues collected by the brāhmaṇa
grantees. Doubtless some of the latter, as in the case of heavily
endowed Buddhist monasteries, forsook their religious or educa-
tional profession and concentrated on the administration required
by the grant. The extensive monastic establishments in eastern
India, such as those at Nālanda, Vikramaśīlā, and Paharpura, to
mention just a few, had an enviable income from large numbers
of villages—a quantitative leap compared to earlier times. This
would have required administrative expertise to carry out the func -
tions of monastic landlordism. The royal order incorporating the
grant was inscribed or written as a charter and maintained by
specified officials, the kārṇikas, with one copy being kept by the
administration and the other by the grantee. Where the grants were
to a large body of people, they could be inscribed on stone in a
public place such as a temple. Grants to individuals and families
were more often engraved on copper-plates, which became legal
documents of possession, to be consulted when required.
The agrahāras and maṭhas (colleges for brāhmaṇas) in some
instances, became a network of political support in return for
royal patronage, parallel in some ways to the Buddhist Saṅgha.
When the religious sectarian identity among these institutions
528 The Past Before Us
changed or became pronounced, the king may have had to adjust
to the change. This may account for the switch from Jainism and
Buddhism to Śaivism and Vaiṣṇavism among various dynasties.
Conversion could have been a matter of personal conviction, but
could also have been conditioned by extraneous reasons of poli-
tical support.
A Pāla inscription records the setting up of a temple and monas-
tery of the Śaiva Pāśupata sect in eastern India.44 Another mentions
brāhmaṇas coming from Lāṭa in western India and establishing a
Vaiṣṇava temple which was supported by grants of villages in the
Puṇḍravardhana bhukti in eastern India.45 A South Indian Śaiva
performs the ritual for the ancestor of Harṣa and other Tantrics are
mentioned as Drāvidas.46 This movement of Tantric ritualists from
Andhra to Thanesar has some parallels in reverse—brāhmaṇas
going from Kashmir to Karnataka. Regional custom and practice
must surely have travelled with them. Perhaps the notion of the
Sanskrit cosmopolis needs modification to accommodate the more
subtle deśī regional contribution to the mārga mainstream.
The charisma of the renunciate, constituting his moral author-
ity—which was earlier derived from the power of renunciation
and vows of celibacy—was now being replaced by the strength
of sectarian institutions based on wealth and proximity to the
state. Religious identities could have a political edge. Extensive
endowments to temples, including land, required committees
of administrators appointed by the authorities of the temples,
and most were brāhmaṇas. This was a parallel to Buddhist and
Jaina monks as managers of monastic endowments and estab-
lishments. Given their sources of wealth, royal temples became
architecturally elaborate since they were also statements of
power. Rituals for the king and the deity were either parallel or
overlapping.
Other than royalty, patrons of consequence were intermediaries
and feudatories, the upper bureaucracy, and merchants and tra-
ders.47 Among the latter, land on occasion was first purchased and
44 E. Hultzsch, “Bhagalpur Plate of Narayanapāla”, 304ff.
45 Khalimpur Plates, Ep. Ind., 4, 243–54.
46 Cowell and Thomas, 5.169; Kane, 5.76.
47 Inscriptions at Ittagi, Ep. Ind., 13, no. 4.37ff.
Biographies as Histories 529
then donated. Similarly, money was invested and the interest was
used in maintaining the institution, an activity expanding from
earlier beginnings. Some of the most prosperous temples are locat-
ed at centres of exchange and trade, and along routes linking these
centres, a situation not too different from the location of Buddh -
ist monasteries.
Villages are sometimes mentioned as having councils where
their headmen, merchants, and officials, occasionally together
with the sāmanta and higher-level adhikārīs (officers), met to
consider matters relating to administration, maintenance, revenue,
irrigation, and disputes.48 Sometimes a caste changed from a low
status to respectability, as with the Kaivartas. In the earlier period
they were rated low, associated with boatmen, fishermen, or else
forest-dwellers such as the Niṣāda or even the dāsas,49 or were des-
cribed as a mixed caste—sankīrṇa jāti, or as antyajas. Yet in Pāla
times they had status and were ranked as a sat-śūdra or clean
śūdra caste, in the hierarchy of various śūdra non-brāhmaṇa
castes.50 Others holding high office, such as scribes (karaṇas), are
described as being of mixed brāhmaṇa and śūdra origin, the peren-
nial problem of the varṇāśramadharma—conceding high status
to those earlier said to be of low origin.51 These were the agen-
cies through which a limited upward social mobility was possible
over a few generations.
The biographies suggest that there were areas of either no or
little governance, with autonomy left relatively undisturbed. The
Śabaras in the Harṣacarita are forest-dwellers well away from
state administration. The departure of Harṣa leaves them to their
own resources. The Kaivartas were feudatories, but their rise
to power and functioning suggest recent chiefdoms rather than
long-standing dissatisfied feudatories in a well-controlled king-
dom. Rāmapāla introduced agriculture, cattle-breeding, and trade
after he conquered Varendrī.52 This is generally said of areas
48 Miraj Inscription, Ep. Ind., 19, 37–9.
49 R. Fick, Social Conditions in North-eastern India during the Buddha’s Time,
302; The Laws of Manu, 10.34.
50 V.N. Jha, “Varṇasaṃkara in the Dharmasūtras: Theory and Practice”,
273–88; R.C. Majumdar, History of Bengal, I, 567ff.
51 Tippera Copper-plate, Ep. Ind., 15, 301–15.
52 Rāmacarita, 2.28.
530 The Past Before Us
newly opened up, but here it would probably have been the ex-
tending and intensifying economic resources. The Kaivartas are
referred to as nāyaka and occasionally rājā, but not sāmanta or
mahārāja. The election of Gopāla, the first Pāla king, to kingship
suggests a frontier area where kingship was still new.
10. The King as Deity
From the brahmanical perspective the cakravartin could be a
manifestation of deity, which doubtless encouraged kings to claim
they were avatāras. Where the king was transgressing a norm,
this claim attempted to explain away the transgression. Claiming
incarnation as a political manoeuvre suggests that the appeal to
divinity had multiple utility. Part of the reason for this claim could
go back to the possible Bhṛgu redaction of the epics. If the epics
were converted into texts of Vaiṣṇava Bhagavatism by a protago-
nist in each being projected as an incarnation of Viṣṇu, then the
intercession of Viṣṇu and Śiva in the actions of later kings would
be an extension of their earlier effort. The king as the incarnation
of a deity both drew from and added to the prominence of the deity,
familiar to the Puranic religion. The shift from divine attributes to
divine incarnation made a qualitative difference to the notion of
causality in the historical presentation of a particular reign. The
idiom changes between the early and later authors of the carita
literature, in which some play of imagination is permitted.
The king as an incarnation of Viṣṇu had many familiar reso-
nances. The symbol of Viṣṇu was the cakra (wheel), suggesting
the cakravartin; the vijigīṣu is the hub of the wheel in the circle of
the maṇḍala; in the concept of the trimūrti (trinity of gods),Viṣṇu
is the one who preserves and sustains, a function also required of
the king. The intervention of Śiva incarnate is less frequent, but
Viṣṇu being incarnated is a familiar idea.
Divinity in the epics and in these biographies is significantly
different, for when a king is said to be an incarnation, he is not
made into an icon of worship—as were the epic incarnations
Rāma and Kṛṣṇa. The earlier incarnations were an afterthought,
whereas in the biographies the kings were contemporary with the
authors and were historically established persons. The function of
incarnation was therefore different in the biographies.
Biographies as Histories 531
What adds a further dimension to invoking deity is that the
biographies were liberated from being knitted into or added on to
ritual texts; nor did they become such texts. Although deities are
invoked, the priority of this genre is political. This may explain the
more flexible treatment of divinity. A god is rustled up whenever
required, or else introduced indirectly, as in the Rāmacarita.The
king as patron and the court poet as author gave a different turn
to the earlier patron–priest/bard relationship.
Curiously, references to earlier cakravartins are not to actual
rulers who held sway over vast territories—such as those of the
Maurya, Kuṣāṇa, or Gupta dynasties—but to the heroes of still
earlier times who would at most have only been rājās of small
territories. The obvious parallel is to the contrary, namely, the in-
voking of Aśoka in the Buddhist tradition. Mauryan and Kuṣāna
kings would probably have been excluded because they were
patrons of the heterodox, but the Guptas who patronized Puranic
Hinduism could have been invoked.
The use of incarnations and divine intervention also had to
do with the greater political accommodation of the Puranic reli-
gion, as compared to the earlier Vedic Brahmanism. The former
availed itself of some aspects of Brahmanism, partly for purposes
of legitimation, but was essentially different. It incorporated the
new bhakti or devotional forms of worship, though Bhagavatism
and the Śākta and Śaiva cults, as well as subsuming aspects of
Sramanism. Among the significant changes was the focus on the
individual seeking liberation from rebirth. Whereas previously
one’s karma—the effect of one’s actions in a former life on the
present—was crucial, now there was through bhakti the mediation
of the deity as well. Reliance on the deity could take the form of
the grace of the deity and a sharing in this grace.
In references to the king’s access to divinity, the question of
whether the deity is controlling human action or acting accord-
ing to human ambition is not made clear. The significance of the
deity also raises the question of whether the divinity claimed by
the king, demarcating or separating him from others, was in fact
conducive to reducing his actual power. Those who claimed that
a particular king was a reincarnation of a deity were controlling
the claim since their claim was what gave it authenticity. But the
claim, having once been accepted, would provide the necessary
532 The Past Before Us
legitimacy to the king in any confrontations with others. The divin-
ization of the king therefore isolated him. His access to power took
on a dual dimension. The isolation was increased by surrounding
him with retainers rather than kinsmen. With kinsmen there are
norms of expected behaviour devolving from the relationship.
With retainers, the relationship has to be negotiated on the basis
of expectancy and expediency. This did not entirely preclude
using kinsmen, as Rāmapāla did in the initial foray against the
Kaivartas.
The politics of associating a deity with an action or of making
the king an incarnation of deity is demonstrated in some other
biographies, as for example in Bilhaṇa’s biography of the Cālukya
king Vikramāditya VI, the Vikramāṅkadevacarita, written in the
late eleventh century. The central act on the part of the king which
had to be justified in the biography was his getting rid of his elder
brother and usurping the throne. This we are told was done on the
instructions of Śiva, who appeared to the king and complained
that the elder brother was evil and incompetent. In a subsequent
biography of Vikramāditya VI written by his son, the king is said
to have been an incarnation of Viṣṇu, perhaps in competition with
the contemporary Hoysala king—also said to be an incarnation of
Viṣṇu! As for the elder brother, the inscriptions he issued suggest
that he was a patron of the Jainas and may possibly have been a
Jaina himself. Given the intense rivalry between Śaivas and Jainas
in the peninsula in those times, the biographies and inscriptions
seem to point to a confrontation between religious sects vying for
power, supporting various contenders for the throne whose con-
front ations were not for political office alone. These are not flur -
ries of religiosity but carefully thought-out political manoeuvres
using the idea of divine incarnation. Despite the biographer’s
attempt to hide this conflict, it becomes visible to the discerning
reader.
Where there was uncertainty of political authority, there
the resort to a deity helped in maintaining the rhetoric of power.
Identification with a deity, for which the compulsion was both
personal and political, was, in addition to patronage, also a mecha-
nism for strengthening particular religious sects; or it could have
been an attempt to subordinate other religious groups; or else to
Biographies as Histories 533
balance political and religious authority. As an incarnation, the
king would be of immediate consequence to the ranking of reli-
gious sects in the hierarchy of privilege and power. Where the
association was with religious sects already in positions of domi-
nance, there the status of the king would be strengthened. Deity
and religious sect could also be used to challenge the power of a
particular family. All this added to the instrumental significance
of biography.
A partial comparison may be possible here with the thesis of the
king’s two bodies as propounded for medieval European kingship,53
in which it is argued that there is a Body Natural and a Body
Politic, but the need to unify the two is constantly emphasized.
The Body Politic is sometimes seen as descended from Grace.
Kingship becomes in part a mediary between the Christian Church
and the secular state, where the latter comes increasingly to be
represented by the Law. The hierarchical apparatus of the Roman
Catholic Church became the prototype of an absolute monarchy
based on the use of mystical ideas. But gradually the state becomes
more polity-centred. The absence of a properly regulated church
in the Puranic context gives a different complexion to king and
deity. Nevertheless, even if a universal church was absent, there
was a degree of institutionalization in most religious sects of this
period, which allows of a relationship between the sect and the
state, although the nature of this relationship differed from that
of the Christian Church.
11. Politics of Sects and Factions
Religious factionalism was obviously of political importance.
Even if it is not referred to openly in the biographies, it marks a
further historical change from earlier times. In the Harṣacarita it
is significant that Harṣa takes the Buddhist ascetic Divākaramitra
back with him. Buddhist groups were also proximate in the Pāla
kingdom. If religious factionalism was involved in the ambigu-
ity of succession, stemming in part from Rājyavardhana being
a Buddh ist, then the presence of these heterodoxies and their
potential in the politics of the time have to be acknowledged.
53 E.H. Kantorowicz, The King’s Two Bodies.
534 The Past Before Us
Judging by the description of the Kaivartas, it would seem that
the dissension between them and Rāmapāla and his immediate
predecessors was due to economic and social disparities, common
among overlords and those who labour. It may also have had a
sectarian dimension. Buddhist and Tantric sects were popular
in eastern India at this time, to the extent that the local variant
of Buddhism, Vajrayāna, had a strong Tantric component; and
the biography refers to an important Buddhist monastery.54 It is
unlikely that the aṭavīyasāmantāḥ (forest chiefs) and the vyālāḥ
who confiscated the agrahāra land of the brāhmaṇas and are listed
among the rebels, were conventional worshippers of Śiva and
Viṣṇu. Rāmapāla being referred to as the incarnation of Viṣṇu
may not have been compatible with the popular sects.55
The induction of deity into the political activities of the king
contributed to what appears to have been the parallel authorities
of court and temple. Both were statements of power. However,
patronage could be distributed when the same king supported
diverse sects; or else it could be conditioned by social needs, as
when royalty built temples to Puranic deities whereas the wealthy
merchants were patrons of the Jainas.
There are inscriptions in which royal donors establish temples
to a variety of sects—Śaiva, Vaiṣṇava, Buddhist, Jaina.56 There are
also single sites where royal patrons made donations to a temple
over decades. Such statements on grants read as a history of the
site, and information on the past becomes available to those who
want it. Many grants are made by officials, ministers, merchants,
and landowners going back to an earlier period, suggesting that
particular sects were well endowed with patronage.
The biographies need also to be viewed from the perspective
of the religious polemics of the period. Had the patronage to the
Buddhists or in other cases to the Jainas been augmented each
time, then the predominant institutions legitimizing the monar-
chy would have been the Buddhist or the Jaina Saṅghas and the
bio graphies would have read differently. This was avoided by the
54 Rāmacarita, 3.7.
55 Ibid., 5.7–8.
56 Sikarpur Taluk Inscriptions of Somesvara III, Epigraphia Carnatica, 7,
Sk 100.
Biographies as Histories 535
succession of the younger brothers and the intervention of Śiva
and Viṣṇu.
Affiliation with a religious sect becomes part of the signature
even of the more localized hero. The heroic ethos is elaborated
in the clusters of hero-stones in various parts of the subcontinent,
becoming more common in this period.57 These commemorate
death on the battlefield, or in protecting the village from human
predators, or its cattle from raiders. They are a reflection of the
heroic qualities associated with a local leader or sometimes a
potential rājā. This may have been the counterpoint to the notion
of the earlier aśvamedha and similar rituals. Specific incidents of
heroic action distinct from great conquests are commonly linked
to the lesser persons of the hero-stones. For the hero there is
no karma, no rebirth, only an eternity in heaven. His sectarian
affiliation depicted on the stone was doubtless a matter of per-
sonal belief, but given the social identity of religious sects, link-
ages relating to the affiliations of villages or overlords cannot be
ignored.
Yet the theory of karma is not the sole causal explanation in the
biographies for there is also the interplay of one’s karma with the
varṇāśramadharma, the need to observe the social code of one’s
caste. The biography was aware of the norms and kept as close as
possible to them. Discrepancies entered where this could not be
done. Individual action was also in part influenced by the point in
the cycle of time in which the person lived. Thus, in the Kaliyuga
the ability to conform to the social code becomes more difficult
as the code is disregarded by most. There is an inevitable social
decline implicit in the time cycle. But the individual can opt out
of it by pursuing his own liberation from rebirth, his mokṣa.
12. Time Concepts
Notions of time continued to be multiple, used simultaneously in
the same society, but varying with different functions. The span
of cosmological time remained the cyclic mahāyuga (the great
57 Romila Thapar, “Death and the Hero”, in Cultural Pasts, 680–97; S. Settar
and G.D. Sontheimer, Memorial Stones.
536 The Past Before Us
overarching age) as described in the Purāṇas with the vast figures
of its cosmological frame. Cosmological time was still viewed
as the geometry of space, infinite and not subject to calibration;
or rather, even the measurement becomes a fantasy. Cyclic time
is essentially metaphorical, and by now the decline of dharma
through the ages becomes far more central than the measurement
of time, which remains a mathematical figment. The mahāyuga is
so immense that its return can only be thought of as an idea. It is
beyond measurement. References were to the current Kaliyuga
but largely in association with the decline of dharma, rather than
as time-reckoning. The notion of social and moral decline in the
Kaliyuga is predictable as a theory where, in a declining cycle of
time, this would be an inevitable description.
As against the immeasurable mahāyuga, manageable timespans
were common, such as the sequence of generations, where each
was an approximate unit of reckoning, or the short span of an event
as covered in the biographies and set in the time and space of
routine events and daily actions. These were calculated more fre-
quently in linear time. Linear time therefore continues to record
human action. The biography picks the single person, magnifies
his actions, and provides him with a dynastic history. This is not
a history determined by cosmic cyclic time which is too distant,
but it can be viewed as a minuscule arc of time within the cosmic
cycle. However, its treatment of time is linear. It is pragmatic time
relating to eras, generations, and events of significance within
reach of contemporary dynasties.
The narrative of the biography was in chronological order. Occa-
sionally, a later event may be brought forward to explain the
narrative in greater depth. Thus, possibly Bhāskaravarman’s alli-
ance with Harṣa was subsequent to the latter ruling from Kanauj.
Familiar eras were used,58 except when a reigning king wished
to proclaim his status by departing from these and commencing
a new era with a major event of his reign, thus also providing, on
58 Such as the samvats of Vikrama 58 bc, Śaka ad 78, Kalacuri/Cedi ad 248–9,
Gupta ad 320, Harṣa ad 606, Laukika 3076 bc, and Kaliyuga 3102 bc, etc. Some
discrepancies of upto a year occur in a few of the reckonings, often relating to
current or expired years, and the precise date of the commencement. Generally
however a correct equivalent calculation is possible.
Biographies as Histories 537
occasion, evidence of regnal years. The more prestigious of such
eras, which included the Harṣa era of ad 606, continued in use
for a few centuries.59
Cyclic time is not emphasized in the biographies, in part be-
cause their concern is with historical and contemporary events.
The Kaliyuga prophesies the current period as one of decline.60
The biography assumes the reverse, a movement up towards the
golden age of the king’s reign, and the successful outcome of
the central event. This was the return of rightfulness and stabil-
ity, where social codes were observed and economic prosperity
widely experienced. The evils of the Kali age begin to fade and the
millenarian fantasy also becomes somewhat irrelevant.
The continuing references in the Purāṇas to the world turned
upside down are surprising, since from the Guptas onwards there
was an assertion of the brahmanical presence in court circles; for,
even when lower-caste families rose to the status of dynasties, they
claimed the correct kṣatriya status and sought the assistance of the
brāhmaṇas to establish this status. Admittedly, however, together
with the new kṣatriya castes of rājaputra, sāmanta, rauta, ranaka,
and so on, were the lesser but powerful castes of the kāyasthas,
gāvuṇḍas, heggdes, and suchlike. The behaviour of the overly
powerful and arrogant kāyasthas in Kashmir, for example, is des-
cribed as that of upstarts.61 The fears linked to the Kaliyuga in the
Purāṇas registers the awareness of a change from the past.
13. Literacy
Literacy in an oral society, it has been argued, can have an en-
abling effect, with a dependence on the literate for interpretation,
59 Alberuni’s India, vol. II, 5.
60 The Kaliyuga is referred to in the Aihole Inscription of Pulakeśin II, the
Cālukya king, and its date has been calculated to 3102 bc: Ep. Ind., 6, 1ff. It
remains debatable as to whether it reflects the conditions prevalent in northern
India after the turn of the Christian era, when the norms of the Dharmaśāstras
were being flouted in the growing social change and the induction of foreign
elites from the north-west of the subcontinent and Central Asia: B.N.S.Yadav,
“The Accounts of the Kali Age and the Social Transition from Antiquity to the
Middle Ages”, 31–63; R.S. Sharma, Early Medieval Indian Society, 44–76.
61 Rājataraṅgiṇī, 4.621–9, 8.131.
538 The Past Before Us
identification, and order.62 The itihāsa-purāṇa tradition not only
takes form in new genres of texts but uses new sources. There
are references to the akṣapaṭalādhikṛta (officer in-charge of legal
documents) in inscriptions of the Gupta period, and to a keeper of
state documents in Chinese accounts of travel in India.63 Xuanzang
refers to official annals but provides no details. Such keepers of
records may have originated earlier.64
The spread of literacy was doubtless assisted by the multiple
places of learning associated with grants of land. But the emer-
gence of elites is not dependent only on what has been called the
feudalization of the agrarian economy. Urbanization also created
wealthy elites through the activity of agrarian market centres and
the revival of trade in cities within the subcontinent as well as with
other parts of Asia.65 Elites of mixed origins and cultures inhabited
urban centres at the turn of the Christian era social codes were
flexible, as when wealthy brāhmaṇas drew a substantial income,
from trading in horses.66
The literate at the court are presumed to have been largely
brāhmaṇas, but members of other castes participated in adminis-
trative functions requiring literacy. There is a historical distinction
between brāhmaṇas learned in the Vedas, emphasizing ritual and
mantra, and those who used literacy for more general purposes.
At the other end of the spectrum from ritual texts were the Pañca-
tantra and the Hitopadeśa, both written by brāhmaṇas. The Bhṛgu
brāhmaṇas, for example, may not have abandoned ritual, but their
control over the itihāsa literature shows a perceptive understanding
of the importance of capturing the past and reflecting a particular
version of it in a literate form. Recognition of the historical func-
tions of a strongly literate tradition may initially have come from
observing these in Buddhist and Jaina institutions. Castes such as
the kāyasthas, who functioned as scribes and record-keepers of
62 M. Finley, Politics in the Ancient World, 30ff.
63 Copper-Plate Inscription of Śīlāditya VII, in J.F. Fleet, Corpus Inscrip-
tionum Indicarum, III, 171–91; T. Watters, On Yuan Chwang’s Travels in India,
1, 154.
64 Such as the karana of the Mauryan period: J. Bloch, Les Inscriptions
d’Asoka, 96, 134; Arthaśāstra, 2.7.17–36.
65 B.D. Chattopadhyaya, The Making of Early Medieval India.
66 Peheva Inscription, Ep. Ind., 1, 184–90.
Biographies as Histories 539
the administration (though ranked lower than brāhmaṇa), were
on occasion highly respected as royal biographers and composers
of lengthy inscriptions.67 The articulation of the past was viewed
as important to the political representation of both past and pre-
sent. It is also interesting that the term itihāsa occurs with greater
frequency in this period, in both texts and inscriptions.
The increase in agrahāras resulted in larger numbers of edu-
cated brāhmaṇas. This was not unconnected with the impressive
articulation of learning and literature in Sanskrit during this
period, as also with a brāhmaṇa diaspora in distant places, both
in the subcontinent and beyond, competing with the diaspora of
Buddhist scholars, monks, and traders. In the subcontinent this
migration coincided with the multiplication of courts seeking
brāhmaṇa retainers as court poets and chroniclers. The carita
literature was part of the formal education of those who claimed
to be learned, and those who described themselves as the “new
Bāṇas”.68 Creative literature in Sanskrit during this period was
closely tied to life at the court but had a habitat in the maṭhas and
ghaṭikās often attached to temples, and more so in the agrahāras,
as indeed also in the Jaina monasteries of Karnataka and Gujarat,
and the Buddhist monasteries in eastern India. Monastic establish-
ments of whatever denomination were repositories of earlier texts,
and many monks or students spent their days making fresh copies
of these texts, and scholars writing commentaries on them.
The premium on literary creativity is expressed in the pride
which kings took in being regarded as literary figures. Of the three
major rulers of the seventh century in the subcontinent, two—
Harṣa, and Mahendravarman the Pallava king—are credited with
being playwrights of high quality. Even if Harṣa was not the author
of the plays attributed to him, it is significant that he wished to
be seen as such, as indeed a few centuries later the Cālukya king
Someśvara III wished to be remembered as a scholar.
This also tended to encourage the creation of cultural idioms
which were recognized across large regions and acted as bonds
67 Rewa Stone Inscription of the time of Karna: Cedi samvat 800, Ep. Ind.,
24, no. 13, 101ff.; Kalanjara Inscription of VS 1147, Ep. Ind., 31, no. 22, 163ff.;
Yājñavalkya, 1.322; Viṣṇu Dharma Sūtra, 7.3.
68 A.K. Warder, Indian Historiography, 116–17. Sakalavidyācakravartin’s
Gadyakarṇāmṛta was composed in the thirteenth century.
540 The Past Before Us
between those who subscribed to a sanskritized, mainstream
culture—what was referred to as mārga, as opposed to deśī or the
localized observances.69 That the distinction is made in theoreti-
cal works points to its recognition. A change in cultural ways is
signalled by the use, however haltingly, of Sanskrit, and by the
transition to a semblance of varṇa society adopting social norms
traced to the Dharmaśāstras, even if adhered to more in theory
than in practice.70
Similarities in narratives and symbols begin to be noticed,
and gradually become a kind of cultural shorthand. This cultural
capital came to be invested in local communities which witnessed
a manipulation of language, caste, and deity. Models are imitated
and the act of imitation spurs a dialogue between the mārga and
the deśī, where elements of each are intertwined, although the
former may underplay the presence of the latter. One of the con-
sequences of this was bilingualism in the court and administra-
tion, which is reflected in bilingual inscriptions, as well as in the
composition of texts in the regional languages that draw on models
from literature in Sanskrit. From the early second millennium ad
categories of itihāsa texts begin to be composed in the regional
languages. The historical moment at which the regional language
becomes significant would mark a change among those involved
in maintaining the historical tradition.
Literacy among non-brāhmaṇa castes such as the kāyasthas
points to some flexibility as to who could be taught Sanskrit.
Engravers of epigraphs mention their names alongside that of the
author. This was in part a legal requirement, but also had to do
with recognizing the importance of script to learning. That these
69 The terms are used largely in works on music, aesthetics, and literature, but
were extended to a wider context of types of cultures. As such, they are useful
in demarcating the mainstream Sanskritic culture—mārga, from what is referred
to variously as the local, regional, or vernacular culture—deśī.
70 This was a process of “sanskritization” and not of “aryanization”, Aryan
being a language label and not having a distinct racial or ethnic connotation.
At best it can be used for the introduction of a Sanskritized language and the
culture ways that went with it. I am using the term in a different sense from the
more accepted term “Sanskritization”, introduced by M.N. Srinivas, where the
reference is more to caste behaviour in which lower castes attempt to adopt the
lifestyle of upper castes.
Biographies as Histories 541
engravers appear to have been of lower castes would point to the
availability of a minimum literacy at levels other than those in the
upper castes, although the range of the literate lower castes would
have been confined to certain occupations.
Respect for the written document was not merely the result
of conforming to the requirements of legal procedures. Texts
were maintained, preserved, and copied when necessary. The
importance of the text is also demonstrated by the large number
of ṭīkās (commentaries) written at this time. The earlier original
text was valued as an articulation from the past, as also the need
for updating or explaining it without tampering with it. By their
very nature, commentaries are conscious of a historical relation-
ship between an earlier text and contemporary views. However,
questions concerning the historicity of the events and persons,
although occasionally considered, are not central to these com-
mentaries. The implicit evolution of concepts receives greater
recognition. The commentaries may also have been encouraged
by the proximity of scholarship from heterodox sources, since the
commentarial tradition was established earlier in Buddhist schol-
arship, of which, as we have seen, it was a significant component,
especially in narrating earlier history.
14. Caritas and History
Itihāsa-purāṇa was recognized by now as a branch of knowledge
and itihāsa is mentioned as deserving attention.71 The interpreta-
tion of the past was in the hands of those who were educated in
the agrahāras, or linked to the royal court, or directly involved
in the administration of the kingdom. Other keepers of the past
are less visible in the records of the elite, but are present else-
where. By the end of the first millennium ad, scholasticism in
the subcontinent went beyond the tradition of Vedic learning
and included much else, such as the Puranic and the Tantric, not
to mention the diversity of philosophical schools and the im-
pressive advances in mathematics, medicine, and astronomy. A
transition had taken place where, in many areas, there had been
a change from “heterodoxy”—the dominance of Buddhist and
71 Two Eastern Ganga Copper Plates, Ep. Ind., 26, no. 5, 62ff., ll. 9–10.
542 The Past Before Us
Jaina institutions—to the emergence of brahmanical institutions,
but in part modelled on the heterodox. An example of this was
the adaptation of the idea of the Buddhist monastery to the Śaiva
maṭha. Brahmanical learning would not have been averse to the
unacknowledged appropriation of aspects of these historiogra-
phies. This encouraged explorations in other ways of thinking,
such as in creative literature, philosophy, and aesthetics, and, not
least, new ways of recording the past.
The imprint of brahmanical learning influenced other contend-
ers for the status of intellectuals. Foremost among these were the
kāyasthas. Even as a functional group, they had come to be as-
sociated with extensive learning. It would be expected that their
perspective would be much more tied to ground realities, given that
it grew out of the nitty-gritty of routine administration and proxi-
mity to political authority. It is interesting that Sandhyākaranandin
does not flinch at describing the rebellious intermediaries causing
the Pālas to lose Varendrī. Admittedly, at one level a detailed des-
cription of the revolt, and the cajoling of the feudatories required
to counter it, strengthens the claim that Rāmapāla was politically
more astute than his brothers, and capable of organizing the sup-
pression of the revolt. But that this was made the central event
of the biography may have had more to do with the social and
intellectual outlook of the author, reflecting his perception of the
power of the state. The implicit argument is that intermediaries
and feudatories at any level are not to be trusted and have to be
almost beguiled into loyalty. Was he demarcating cateogires of
grantees? Even scribes who were recipients of grants of land, be-
cause they were primarily the administrators, probably had a
greater loyalty to the dynasty.
This is in some ways a contrast to the description of official-
dom in the Harṣacarita, where Bāṇa describes it in unflattering
terms, as consisting of people virtually bereft of self-respect and
constantly fawning on their superiors.72 Four centuries later, such
groups had found a niche and a superior status. Chronicles from
the court were almost by definition hagiographical: exaltation of
72 Kane, 2.23ff., 7.118ff.; Cowell and Thomas, 7.248ff., 2.60–2.
Biographies as Histories 543
the ruler is characteristic of most. Chinese annals describing the
reception of the Chinese ambassador at the court of Harṣa and
the message of goodwill sent by Harṣa to the Chinese ruler, or
the report of the mission of Wang-hsuan-ts’e in India against the
usurper of Harṣa’s throne, use a phraseology which is far from a
historically accurate reflection of the relations between Harṣa and
the T’ang ruler.73 Its intention is to flatter the latter.
The vaṃśa lists in the Purāṇas had been discontinued. The
material on contemporary dynasties was incorporated into the new
historical narratives and royal inscriptions. The court poet as an
employee of the king changed the relationship between political
authority and its legitimizer. The bard had not been an employee.
Although there continued to be a mutual dependence between the
poet and the ruler, the balance had tilted in favour of the latter,
particularly where the court poet was also a functionary. In king-
doms where the bard continued to keep the genealogy—possibly
in the smaller courts which could not maintain a court poet—he re-
mained the legitimizer of the ruling family. He was more integrated
in such a society, for it was not imprinted fully with courtly culture.
Still regarded as inviolable and respected because of his function
as legitimator of the ruler, he had a different relation with chiefs,
rājās, and even kings. The formal status of the bard, the sūta, and
the māgadha was by now unambiguously low.74 Nevertheless, the
bard was permitted to dissent, and pass judgement on his patron.
He had the freedom to criticize the king, as is recorded for Mewar
in the fourteenth century.75 To that extent the bard had a floating
status, respected because of his occupation but conditioned by his
actual relationship with the court. Ideas spread faster through oral
communication, although they remained in a more limited region,
whereas literacy tended to nourish a relatively closed group, even
if it had a much wider lateral spread.
The maintaining of a court poet and the writing of a biogra-
phy became something of a status symbol. When the kingdom
73 D. Devahuti, Harsha, 244ff.
74 Nāradasmṛti, 12.113–16.
75 V.N. Zeigler, “Marwari Historical Chronicles”, 219ff.
544 The Past Before Us
was economically sound and the royal family reasonably secure,
it could move from the local bard to the court poet. The latter,
familiar with the itihāsa-purāṇa tradition and kāvya literature,
picked up the family history perhaps from the bard, consulted the
oral and the literate traditions including the inscriptions, and wove
these strands into a carita, withholding or disguising that which
he thought more prudent not to mention openly. Biographies and
chronicles were a merging of records, memory, and intentions.
Common elements structured the form and made it distinctive as
an authorized version of an activity of a king.
It may well be asked if this changed form of the itihāsa-purāṇa
tradition can still be considered a continuation of the earlier tradi-
tion. There was nostalgia for the past, continuity from the past, and
the claim that the past as well as the present were being described
as having actually happened. Legitimacy of status and action, and
royal antecedents, drew on this tradition as sources of informa-
tion on the past. What did change, and most obviously so, was the
form of the record. It was no longer attached to another text. As
in the Buddhist and Jaina historical tradition, the itihāsa-purāṇa
was given recognition in new and independent forms specific to
the discourse on itihāsa. Consequently, what was also quite new
was that the authorship differed from earlier times, priests and
monks being replaced by courtiers and administrators. A large
part of the narration now pertained to the present, although it
was treated as historical by the next generation. Characteristic
of the carita was that it narrated the story of an individual and
not a community, clan, or lineage. It endorsed individual action,
giving a direction to events. Inevitably the individual rises above
the office he holds.
Kingship had also to relate to institutions. In the Buddhist tra-
dition the relationship of the king to the Saṅgha is unambiguous.
History mobilizes support for the king, who models himself on
exemplars. The Puranic tradition is ambiguous in identifying an
institution. In an indirect way, the sāmantas as recipients of grants
of land formed an institution to which the king had to relate, as
is evident in the Rāmacarita. Brāhmaṇas holding grants of land
also legitimized kings, although in a less direct way.
Genealogies are memories of social relationships. They are
Biographies as Histories 545
renewed and change over time. Texts emanating from courtly
literature remain largely unchanged. New perspectives cannot
be accommodated by an interpolation into an existing composi-
tion. It requires a new text. “Fixation in writing once achieved,
primarily had a preserving effect upon the oral tradition because
it put an end to the involuntary shiftings of the remembrances and
drew limits to the arbitrary creation of new stories.”76 The pos-
sibility of transmuting the past decreases; the past now becomes
that which is set apart and can be enquired into. The heroic past
and the post-heroic past do have continuity, but the external forms
can be very different. Nevertheless, the biography is not entirely
an official document since it incorporates the perspective of the
author. To that extent, it may disagree even marginally with the
more recognized official documents, namely the inscriptions is-
sued by king and court. The caritas were a recitation of the present
but with an awareness of the past through a narrative that largely
kept to the order in which events happened.77 The author creates
a flexible link between the past and the present. The reliability of
sources depends on whether the account is accepted or dismissed
by contemporaries. Other authors are seldom quoted.
The centrality of the individual in the context of the socio-
religious ethic was perhaps more sharply etched in Buddhist and
Jaina writing. It was pursued in the bhakti teaching of Puranic
Hinduism and in the focus on the self in Tantric practice. Notions
of the king’s dharma drew from the ideals of the cakravartin,
although defined differently in the Buddhist and brahmanical
tradition. The sense of history is apparent in placing the king in
the context of a dynasty with a past, in references to the acts of
earlier rulers with a comment on these. An assessment of the role
of kingship meant referring to past occasions when kings faced
situations that were either problematic or celebratory. The play
on divinity is new and shows a political use of deity which can
be either subtle or obvious. Whether kings should see themselves
as constituted of divinity is debatable and this provides multiple
76 F. Jacoby quoted in J. Goody (ed.), Literacy in Traditional Societies, 2ff.
77 Cf. B. Guenée, Historie et Culture Historique dans l’Occident Medievale,
20ff.
546 The Past Before Us
ideas. Despite the hype about the power of kingship, its actual
fragility is recognized.
This new understanding of the function of historical traditions
can be seen further in the royal inscriptions issued by most dynas-
ties, which treated them as official documents, and in vaṃśāvalīs
validating rulers and their activities.
14
Inscriptions as
Official Histories—and the Voice
of the Bard
1. Inscriptions as Annals
Inscriptions of all periods, being tangible remains from the
past, were initially treated as archaeological objects. They
were read only for information on dynasties and chronolo-
gies, the argument being that they were more reliable than texts
for this purpose—as most are. When first read for socio-economic
data, it was realized that the post-Gupta inscriptions were docu-
ments recording grants as property transactions, and reflected a
significant change in the economic structure of kingdoms. This
gradually led to reading them as texts. Even more recently, they
have been viewed as representing courtly culture, including their
role as annals,1 and inevitably therefore with a context of state
power.
As a text, an inscription is also conditioned by its form, the
material on which it is inscribed, its function, its authorship and
audience, and whether it encapsulates power or not. That they
should be read as distinctive categories of praśasti, śāsana, dāna,
1 R.S. Sharma, Early Medieval Indian Society; Daud Ali, “Royal Eulogy as
World History: Rethinking Copper-plate Inscriptions in Cola India”, 165–229;
D. Ali, Courtly Culture and Political Life in Early Medieval India.
548 The Past Before Us
rather than a single category, is moot. That virtually every dynasty
was in its inscriptions following a generally accepted format marks
these texts as distinct. The format becomes a dialogue, both within
the political office of a dynasty and one that is inter-dynastic. The
titles assumed by rulers need not be taken literally as they were
part of the rhetoric of these relations.
Inscriptions, as we have seen, are historically significant inde-
pendent records. Pre-Gupta inscriptions tended to be diverse and
scattered, pertaining largely to the activities of individual rulers
in summary form. Few were concerned with a more systematic
record of dynastic rule. From about the sixth century ad, their
numbers increase and they become official statements recording
events thought to be significant. Many delineate royal grants of
land to religious and other beneficiaries. Although some record
ritual occasions, this information is not embedded in ritual texts
but remains an independent statement, whether private or official.
Issued by a variety of people for various purposes, priority is given
to the larger number of the rājakīyam (official royal inscriptions).
Others in positions of authority—such as ministers, wealthy mer-
chants, householders, and members of religious sects—also had
their statements engraved. This they did for a variety of reasons,
but most frequently in votive inscriptions recording donations for
various religious purposes. Additionally, post-Gupta inscriptions
embody an awareness of historical traditions.
There are fewer inscriptions on pillars than earlier. When Firuz
Shah Tughluq and others wished to incorporate tangible elements
of past history into their buildings, they had to shift early period
pillars to their new constructions or engrave their inscriptions
at existing sites.2 Reassembling and relocating these entailed
an incorporation of the past into the new record. There were no
extensive discourses on ethics after the Aśokan edicts, but occa-
sionally a short statement on dharma was included. Reinscribing
earlier pillars was easier as there was enough space on them and
the very act was a statement of incorporation.
Manuals for the writing of inscriptions, among other adminis-
trative matters, such as the Lekhapañcāśika or the Lokaprakāśa,
2 B. Flood, Objects of Translation, 227–59.
Inscriptions as Official Histories 549
provide a format and give examples. The scribe who wrote the
document was referred to in early inscriptions as the lipikāra or
lekhaka, and later was often a brāhmaṇa or a kāyastha, proficient
in scribal work and bureaucratic functioning. The written docu-
ment was then given to an engraver, described either as a śilpin
(craftsman), or an ayaskāra (ironsmith), or a hemakāra (gold-
smith). Mistakes in engraving individual letters were corrected
where possible.
The Arthaśāstra refers to many categories of inscriptions and
the variations within each, which include a command, a com-
munication, an authorization, recording a gift, and statements of
a universal nature.3 One of the indications of the more extensive
use of royal inscriptions is that they include categories, such as
śāsanam (instructions), jayapatram (legal decisions), ajñapatram
(orders), and prajñāpanam (proclamations).4 The śāsana was
meant for future kings as well, and therefore had a historical
purpose which required that it be kept in royal custody. Some
inscriptions carried the royal seal or an autograph, which not only
authenticated them but made them viable for future reference.
As noted earlier (in chapter 2), the information provided often
included the genealogy of the person issuing the statement, its
purpose, and a precise date.
The language of these inscriptions is mostly Sanskrit. In
the pre-Gupta period, as we have seen, inscriptions were initially
in Prākrit and subsequently in Sanskrit. In post-Gupta times,
Sanskrit was used extensively. But by the second millennium ad in
northern India inscriptions showed traces of the regional langua ge.
These changes were linked to the marking of social differences.
Whereas Prākrit was inclusive and cut across caste and commu-
nity identities, Sanskrit tended to reify the upper-caste identity.
Cosmopolitan Sanskrit, or what has been called a public political
language transcending political boundaries and affiliations,5 was
the reverse of the local regional language. Its uniformity lay in its
3 Arthaśāstra, 2.10.1–5, 23–4, 38.
4 Yājñavalkyasmṛti, 1.317–19; Dharmakośa, 1.1.349.
5 S. Pollock, “The Sanskrit Cosmopolis, 300–1300 CE: Transculturation,
Vernacularisation, and the Question of Ideology”, 197–249.
550 The Past Before Us
use by administrators, selective religious sects, philosophers, and
litterateurs. Prākrit had reflected regional variations, but now the
regional languages registered these differences. The adoption of
Sanskrit had elements of a formulaic code familiar to the courtly
and urban elite, and was therefore distanced from the popular
language.
Inscriptions do not circulate like books, but most, being public,
enable the circulation of their contents. Some were engraved on
the walls of temples, making them political statements with reli-
gious authority, echoing the earlier latching of historical narrative
onto ritual texts. There may also have been the correct assumption
that the temple, built of superior material, would survive longer,
providing greater longevity to the inscriptions. Not only author-
ship but also intent is here different from the votive inscriptions at
Buddhist sites at the turn of the Christian era. The latter recorded
both individual and group donations which had contributed to
financing the monument. They became community records: such
inscriptions are only occasionally associated with temples.6
The construction of a royal temple marked a distinct phase in
the evolution of the kingdom and symbolized the claim to inde-
pendence and power. The change is marked by the fact that the
temple could have evolved from a local cult shrine associated
with the place of origin of the royal family, and graduated to a
more elaborate structure. The garbha-gṛha (womb-house), which
housed the icon, grew with the addition of maṇḍapas (pavilions)
and antechambers, courtyards, and vimānas (towers), all embel-
lished with sculpture for a large complex. The eminence of the
religious structure helped enhance its assertion of authority.
Inscriptions were also engraved on rock surfaces in the vicinity
of a fort or town, evoking a more direct political authority. Other
inscriptions recording grants were engraved on tāmrapatras/
tāmrapaṭṭas, copper plates held together with a ring and possibly
embossed with the royal seal. These were kept as legal docu-
ments with the family to which the grant had been made. The seal
sometimes has a skeletal list of the rulers of the dynasty. The ring
6 The obvious example is the silk-weavers’ guild at Mandasor. A.L. Basham,
“The Mandasor Inscription of the Silk Weavers”, 93–106.
Inscriptions as Official Histories 551
suggests the format of a grantha (manuscript), the pages of which
were held together by being threaded through one or two holes.
These copper-plate inscriptions were intended as texts, the metal
providing longevity. Kalhaṇa mentions grants and copper-plate
charters of previous times being consulted for information on
past happenings.7 Scribes of the post-Gupta period could prob-
ably read the box-headed brāhmī and its later forms, but Aśokan
brāhmī and kharoṣṭhī may by now have become obscure. Seals
increase in frequency when inscriptions as legal documents have
to be protected from forgery.
The emblem of the Candella rulers, for example, was often
inscribed on the royal seal or on the copper-plate of the grant.
The emblem was that of the gaja-lakṣmī, representing the god-
dess Lakṣmī, standing or occasionally seated, being libated by
an elephant on either side. This image had earlier appeared on
some coins of the gaṇa-rājyas (chiefdoms) and lesser kingdoms
around the Christian era, and was later adopted by various ruling
families. Lakṣmī emerged as the goddess of prosperity and good
fortune (and the consort of Viṣṇu), although in origin she may
have had a different function.
Forgeries (kūṭa-śāsana) were known, and though infrequent
were punishable by death.8 As always, the author and the purpose
of the forgery are of historical interest.9 The forgery was less of
the dynastic data—although an occasional royal seal is tampered
with to change the succession; more often, it was an attempt to
appropriate the rights stated in the grant, especially grants of land.
Harṣa issued an inscription accompanied by what he states is his
signature, revoking such a forgery.10 Occasionally, there are altered
documents, which are of course different from the replacement
copies necessary when the original is damaged.11 Where the forg-
eries were dated back to past times, there must have been records
7 Rājataraṅgiṇī, I.15.
8 The Laws of Manu, 9.232.
9 R. Salomon, “The Fine Art of Forgery”.
10 Madhuban Plates, Ep. Ind., VII, 155–60.
11 Paithan Plates of Govinda III, ibid., III, 103–10; Nidhanpur Copper Plates
of Bhaskaravarman, ibid., XII, 65–79; Kurud Plates of Narendra, ibid., XXXI,
263–6; Rājataraṅgiṇī, 6.14–41.
552 The Past Before Us
available to the forger with which to make plausible copies. Some
later kings are known to have engraved their statement on an ear-
lier record, presumably to acquire credibility—Samudra Gupta’s
inscription on an Aśokan pillar is well known. A few become
palimpsests, but the old engraving remains visible.
Formulae for royal inscriptions evolve from those issued in
the post-Mauryan period. As a new style they carry a praśasti
(eulogy), initially only of the king but soon including his dynasty.
Such inscriptions are often referred to as praśastis. The praśasti
was not intended as a precise statement about the king, but was
a signifier and therefore not always taken literally. It extended its
reach to earlier rulers as well. The titles may be hyperbolic, but the
events were not necessarily fantasy. The point at which the titles
change to those more grand is a significant political moment. The
text of the inscription begins with a benediction in symbol or in
words, and suggests the religious affiliation of the author, as for
example siddham, omsvasti, śrī om namaḥ śivāya, namo bhagavate
vāsudevāya, and so on. In later inscriptions the benediction could
be quite detailed.
Because the copper-plate was a legal document, it had to
carry an updated version of dynastic history, mentioning the
more important kings. The format of the praśasti, generally but
not invariably, traced ancestry back to deities such as Brahmā
and Candra, and ṛṣis such as Marīca, Kaśyapa, Atri, and Manu.
Subsequently, descent was traced through either the Sūryavaṃśa
or the Candravaṃśa or a similar lineage of status, such as the
Agnikula, with a reference to the better known of its heroes. The
latter provide connections to the lineages listed in the Purāṇas.
The praśastis could be exaggerated descriptions of previous rulers.
This was a claim to superiority among a crowd of feudatories who
followed the same rules in their own statements, the exaggerations
having to be decoded.
The place from where the order was issued is mentioned, such
as the royal court or the skandhāvāra (military camp). This was
a way of establishing the credentials of the person issuing the
inscription. Some praśastis read almost like a continuation of the
descent lists in the Purāṇas, linking them to the embedded histori-
cal tradition as well as being a claim to respectability. As against
Inscriptions as Official Histories 553
caritas, they were not restricted to one major figure and central
event. The underlying concern was to tap the past for credibility
and ensure future recognition. Ancestral links are sought with
kṣatriya descent groups and not with dynasties, probably because
the dynasties were of śūdra and brāhmaṇa caste.
The purpose of the inscription is then stated, often the gifting
of revenue from land. The gift is generally treated by the grantee
as heritable, so ownership of the land from which the revenue
comes is assumed. The land bestowed could be a small area, or
one or several villages. Initially, donations were made to Buddhist
monasteries, and this continued in a small way. With a change in
the religious affiliations of kings, the donees were overwhelm-
ingly brāhmaṇas—either individuals or a group. This resulted in
a substantial colonization of new areas. The brāhmaṇas were
inducted either as intermediaries in areas already settled, or they
colonized forest land that had been the preserve of forest-dwellers.
There were varying degrees of assimilation, and therefore change
on both sides could be consensual, but could equally result in
conflicting situations.
Inscriptions recording grants are in effect recording the shift
from yajña to dāna—from the sacrificial ritual to the gift—as
methods of legitimating the donor as the patron and the donee as
the legitimizer. Such inscriptions, where they include information
on the vaṃśa (lineage) of the donor, indicate his authority. Dāna is
not just an expression of generosity, it incorporates the exchange
of authority and status between patron and legitimizer. In some
ways it is a continuation of the idea of gift exchange implicit in
the yajña. However, unlike in the first millennium bc when the
wealth was movable—cattle and gold—the wealth provided in
this period has permanence in the shape of heritable land. This
becomes the basis of tangible power for a category of brāhmaṇas
who were the recipients of grants of land.
In detailing the grant, the qualifications and credentials of the
donee, the terms and conditions of the gift—involving entitlement
to revenue, tax exemptions, judicial rights, and its location—had
all to be stated. Witnesses to the gift, who could be royal officials
or members of the local administration and the community, had to
be listed. The tendency to render this portion of such inscriptions
554 The Past Before Us
into the regional language grew with the increasing use of these
languages in local administration. This was particularly so where
the regional language was different from Sanskrit. The formulaic
portion, the praśasti, continued to be in Sanskrit. The use of two
languages, each representing a different function, was an innova-
tion. To preclude revocation of the grant by future rulers, a phrase
going back to Aśoka was used: “that it was to last as long as the
moon and the sun endure”.
That these grants were of consequence is borne out by the
punishment enunciated for those who revoked them. One seeks
to det er potential revokers with sufferings in hell for 66,000 years,
another threatens rebirth as a dog a hundred times, or finally as
a caṇḍāla or a snake in the desert. Not even digging thousands
of wells, performing a hundred aśvamedhas, and gifting a mil-
lion cows will suffice as expiation.12 Another curses the revoker
with rebirth as a germ in excreta, to be followed by rotting with
his ancestors.13 Yet grants were revoked despite these dire pos-
sibilities.14
In choosing particular grantees, the royal patron and his advi-
sors were well aware of the politics of religious sectarian factions.
Patronage was a form of exercising some control over these, apart
from being an obvious mechanism of drawing benefactions from
them. Vedic specialists claimed they could alter or divert the ill
eff ects of astrological happenings. Perhaps those in power played
with this notion, even if not fully succumbing to it. There was a
search for a coherent universe and astrology claimed to provide one.
The part of the praśasti linked with the vaṃśānucarita used
the link as a charter for claims to lineage and descent. It was a
significant step in crystallizing historical consciousness as part
of the Puranic tradition. The personal legitimacy of the ruling
family and the king’s right to grant land were enhanced via the
genealogical link. Coercing new communities to accepting new
dynastic rule or converting clan societies into subservient peasants
required legitimation. Brāhmaṇa grantees settled on gifted land
12 Four Candella Copper Plate Inscriptions, Ep. Ind., XX, no. 14, 125.
13 Damodarpur Copper Plate Inscriptions, Plate 1, ibid., XV, 129–32.
14 Barah Copper Plate of Bhojadeva, ibid., XIX, no. 2, 17–18.
Inscriptions as Official Histories 555
with the full support of royalty, introduced brahmanical traditions,
and fostered the acceptance of kingship. Such people could grow
into sāmantas, the intermediaries and feudatories who aspired to
independent power. Once the brāhmaṇa became the agency of the
state, a self-conscious utilization of the past conditioned by the
needs of the present brought about an enhanced sense of history
as an asset. Other aspirants to authority, such as the kāyasthas, also
became aware of this. These categories issued their own inscrip-
tions stating the history of their authority.
A rise in status was marked by the praśasti being composed by
a court poet, for whom it was an occasion to show his literary ac-
complishments; or else by an officer of the upper bureaucracy, such
as an amātya, senāpati, or akṣapaṭalādhikārin or sāmanta at the
court. The authors were generally brāhmaṇas and kāyasthas, fre-
quently attached to or close to court circles. The audience was not
limited to members of the court (as with the caritas) but extended
to those who read or heard the contents of the inscription.
There was now the realization that if the past was to be put to
work for the present, it would have to be ordered into a usable
pattern. An earlier example of this lay in organizing the past in
Buddhist and Jaina texts: the advantage of referring to precedents
was being recognized. In a sense, the Mauryan rulers had released
the court from Vedic ritual since they were patrons of the het-
erodox. This was reflected in the construction of pre-Mauryan
and Mauryan history, particularly in Buddhist texts, such as the
Mahāvaṃsa and the Pariśiṣṭaparvan.
The past had been reformulated in the vaṃśānucarita section of
the Purāṇas, which in turn had been formatted as sectarian texts,
a format faintly familiar from Sramanic literature. The new insti-
tutional base of the Vedic and Puranic sects lay in the agrahāras
and temples, and later the maṭhas, and ghaṭikas analogous with
Buddhist vihāras. The competition with Buddhist and Jaina sects
was in part articulated by different notions of kingship and social
ethics. Buddhism maintained that the ruler was elected by the
people and was untouched by deity. The social ethic pointed to
the irrelevance of varṇa by emphasizing a universally applicable
social ethic, denying the inequality central to caste. The Puranic
sects furthered the difference from the Sramanic by their support
556 The Past Before Us
of deities and even of theism—both Vaiṣṇava and Śaiva—over
those arguing that deity was dispensable.
Consciousness of chronology was another aspect of the change.
The event referred to in an inscription is dated in some detail, men-
tioning the tithi (lunar day), the pakṣa (lunar fortnight), the māsa
(month), the season, and the samvat (era). To this can be added
the occasional mention of constellations, equinoxes, or solstices.
Earlier inscriptions tend to be dated in the regnal year of the king,
such as those of the Mauryas, Śuṅgas, and Sātavāhanas. Those of
the Śakas, Indo-Bactrian Greeks, Kṣatrapas, and Kuṣāṇas use the
regnal years as well as an era, such as the Śaka era of ad 78. This
era gave way in many areas to the Vikrama era of 58–7 bc. The
origins of both remain controversial.
The advantage of using an era was demonstrated in Buddhist
and Jaina texts. Each used an era, based on the date of the death
of Mahāvīra (527 bc) and the Buddha (486/3 bc). This may have
been reinforced by Hellenistic usage as well. But, above all,
inscriptional records required precise dating using an era. From
the early first millennium, a series of eras were instituted largely
by kings commemorating events and persons in their respective
dynasties: the Kalacuri-Cedi era of ad 248–9, the Gupta era of
ad 319–20, the Harṣa era of ad 606–7, the Bhāṭika era of 624,
the Newari era of 879, and the Lakṣmaṇasena era of ad 1179, to
mention just a few. Despite these more localized eras the Vikrama
and Śaka eras remained widespread.
The Cālukya king Pulakeśin II’s Aihole inscription of ad 634
uses both the Śaka era, calculated in linear time, as also the Kali-
yuga era from cyclic time. This gives a date of 3102 bc for the start
of the Kaliyuga, thought to be the invention of a later period and
used in calculations relating to astronomy.15 The synchronization
of the two systems of time measurement is useful for correlations.
Prior to this, Āryabhaṭṭa the astronomer, writing in about ad 499,
had calculated the start of the Kaliyuga to the same date. Refer-
ences to dating in the Kaliyuga era are rare in inscriptions because
cyclic time is not their preferred chronological system.
15 Aihole Inscription of Pulakeśin II, ibid., VI, 11–12.
Inscriptions as Official Histories 557
002
0
sertemoliK
seitsanyD
dna
,snalC
,secalP
tnatropmI
eroM
eht
fo
snoitacoL
:6
paM
E
G
N
A
R agnaG
A
Y noS A
L
A
M
a r a k o r
a m In
E
dus
A T Beas
H I G
Ya
a
m
ng
u
a
na labm
a
a
w
hC
teB neK
e g n a R a
K R y h G d
h
s
u
mulehJ
banehC
ivaR
jeltuS
uhdniS n iV
adam
raN
Tapi
K
Kabul
u
d
egnaR
nam
ia n lu
S i H
sudnI
dnamleH
DNAHKLEDNUB
idanahaM
A N A
Ā R M Ā
A H H I
Ā T C A
R P
HRAG
ALDNAM
IDEC-IRUCALAK
A
L Ā V
A
D A
H
Ā G
LUBAK
IHLED
. abohaM
arajñalāK
oharujahK
hdagayajA
ATAKLOK
41
retpahC
,6
paM
558 The Past Before Us
2. Early Candella Inscriptions as Annals
With this background, I would like to demonstrate the use of
inscriptions as annals by considering the inscriptions of the Can-
della dynasty. I have chosen the Candellas at random: they were
one among the many dynasties of the post-Gupta period and
not of extraordinary importance. Their inscriptions demonstrate
how a pattern of history was followed in many kingdoms, and in
inscriptions not nearly as long and impressive as some others of
the period, such as the Cola inscriptions from South India. If we
limit the inscriptions to those that consciously provide a history
of the dynasty, they suggest a recognition of the need to record
history. I would like to illustrate this as aspects of what I have
earlier referred to as externalized history.
The Candellas ruled from the ninth century to the thirteenth
century ad in Central India.16 The heartland of their kingdom was
bounded by the river Yamuna to the north, the valleys of the Ken
and Betwa to the west, that of the Tons in the east, and their sway
extended south almost to the Narmada. The area came to be called
Jejjākabhukti/Jejākabhukti, and later Bundelkhand. The kingdom
was relatively small compared to others of that time. The loca-
tions and locational references in the inscriptions help to broadly
track the areas controlled by the Candellas, although geographical
identifications are not always precise.
The inscriptions record a process of gradual state formation and
the emergence of a kingdom in what was earlier a frontier area at
the peripheries of the Pratihāra, Rāṣṭrakūṭa, and Pāla kingdoms.
The proximate neighbours of the Candellas were the Pratihāras
and the Kalacuri-Cedis, in both of whose state systems the Can-
dellas were initially sāmantas. Later, they had to contend with
the Cāhamānas/Cauhānas and the Gāhaḍavālas to the north-west,
and even briefly with the fleeting raids of Mahmud of Ghazni.
The Candella family may have originally come from the area
of Mahobā, but their first important centre was Kharjūravāhaka/
16 N.S. Bose, History of the Candellas; S.K. Mitra, The Early Rulers of
Khajuraho; R.K. Dikshit, Candellas of Jejakabhukti; K.K. Shah, Ancient Bun-
delkhand.
Inscriptions as Official Histories 559
Khajuraho, subsequent to which they established forts at Kālañjara
and Ajaygadh.
The genealogy of the dynasty, gathered from epigraphs, is as
outlined below.17 (The dates are approximate because they are
calculated on the chronology of the inscriptions.)
Nannuka
Vākpati
Jayaśakti, followed by his brother,
Vijayaśakti
Rāhila
Harṣa, married Kañcukā
Yaśovarman (925), married Puppā
Dhaṅga (950–1003)
Gaṇḍa (1003–1018)
Vidyādhara (1018–1022)
Vijayapāla, married Bhuvanadevī
(1022–1051)
Devavarman (1051) Kīrtivarman (1070–1098)
Sallakṣanavarman Pṛthvīvarman
(1100) (1125)
Jayavarman (1117)
Madanavarman,
(1129–1163)
married Vālhanadevī,
married Lakhamādevī,
married Cāndeladevī
Yaśovarman II (1165)
Paramardi (1165–1202)
Trailokyavarman (1205–1241/47)
Vīravarman, married Kalyāṇadevī
(1247–86)
Bhojavarman (1286–1289)
Hammīravarman (1289–1308)
17 Based on S.K. Mitra, The Early Rulers of Khajuraho, Appendix II.
560 The Past Before Us
The Candella as a clan is mentioned in inscriptions on pāliyas
and govardhana-dhvajas, hero-stones memorializing dead heroes
of various clans. But it is uncertain whether this was prior to their
attaining royal status, or from lesser branches of the clan at a later
period.18
The inscriptions point to a process of state formation, following
a pattern common to many kingdoms of the late first millennium
ad.19 Starting with the status of sāmanta, there is a mutation into an
early kingdom through proclaiming an autonomous status. From
this there evolves a full-fledged kingdom, with inscriptions as the
record of the official version of events important to the history of
the kingdom. These records begin to decrease with the last few
rulers and usually indicate the kingdom’s decline.
The earliest Candella inscription, of what was to become the
royal family, is that of Harṣa/Harṣadeva.20 This is a fragmentary
inscription found near the temple of Vāmana at Khajuraho. The
text begins with a description of the creation of the universe, and
then refers to an ancestor of the Candellas. Another early ances-
tor, Vākpati, had two sons, Jejjāka and Vijjāka, mentioned in later
inscriptions as Jayaśakti and Vijayaśakti, the later names being
an attempt at “sanskritization”. Harṣadeva not only conquered
territory, he also assisted the Pratihāra nṛpati, king, probably his
overlord, to regain his lost throne.21 The statement indicates that
the Candellas, who were erstwhile subordinate to the Pratihāras,
were now aspiring to an independent status, and the kingdom was
taking shape. Later dynastic inscriptions suggest that Harṣa was
probably the one who broke away from being a feudatory.
An inscription of his successor, Yaśovarman, dated to the
Vikrama saṃvat 1011 or ad 953, declares the establishment of the
kingdom and gives its history.22 It was engraved at the Lakṣmaṇa
temple, dedicated to Viṣṇu, at Khajuraho. The inscription in good
Sanskrit verse records the building of the temple by Yaśovar -
man, but the record dates to the reign of his son, Dhaṅga. There is
18 B.D. Chattopadhyaya, The Making of Early Medieval India, 85.
19 H. Kulke (ed.), The State in India, 1000–1700 CE, Introduction.
20 Inscriptions from Khajuraho, no. 1., Ep. Ind., I, 121–2.
21 Stone Inscription of Harshadeva, Ep. Ind., I, 121ff.
22 Stone Inscription of Yasovarman, ibid., 122ff.
Inscriptions as Official Histories 561
mention of a Pratihāra ruler, which could by now suggest an alli-
ance. This inscription is an early historical record of Candella
history and is qualitatively superior to the previous ones.
The inscription begins with an invocation to Viṣṇu as Vaikuṇṭha,
perhaps chosen because of his association with the destruction of
enemies, the asuras, or because of the influential Pañcarātra sect
of Vaiṣṇavas. It refers in passing to the primary and secondary
creation, which constituted two of the five facets of the Viṣṇu
Purāṇa, continues with a mention of various Vaiṣṇava avatāras
and myths, echoing, not unexpectedly, the same source. Having
indicated this as the reference, the history begins with the birth of
the Creator, from whom sprang the sages. Among them Atri begat
the sage Candrātreya, the founding ancestor of the Candella family.
This would give them brāhmaṇa status, but the name Candra +
Ātreya also links them with the Candravaṃśa, the Lunar lineage
of kṣatriyas described in the Viṣṇu Purāṇa.
An early brahma-kṣatra status moved to kṣatriya; this was a
not uncommon procedure among Rajput royal families, where
the former would be a transitional status.23 Widely current in
Rajput origin myths, its relative openness allowed flexibility for
manoeuvre in caste society.24 It also hints at the ancestral figure
having possibly been a brāhmaṇa grantee whose family gradually
established overlordship in an area.25 The genealogy of the family
is given with appropriate laudatory padding and some description
of each successor. Ascendant genealogies such as this are common
in inscriptions and were regarded as historical, even if they were
subjected to some telescoping or the suppression of collaterals,
not unusual in genealogies. The names that are retained are those
viewed as historically significant.
Rajput clans had a recognized hierarchy. Those of the Agnikula,
the Fire Family, were four, of which the Cāhamānas were one, and
the ancestor of each of these four was said to have emerged from
the sacrificial fire of a sage. Of lesser status were the remaining
23 B.D. Chattopadhyaya, The Making of Early Medieval India, 71.
24 D.C. Sircar, Problems of Kuṣāṇa and Rajput History, 6–11.
25 As, for example, in the Khoh Copper-plate Inscription, Corpus Inscriptio-
num Indicarum, III, 93ff., 100ff.
562 The Past Before Us
ones, descended from human ancestors, such as the Kalacuris, who
linked themselves to the ancestral hero Yayāti of the Candravaṃśa.
The Candellas, being of lower status, had to invent an origin myth
incorporating deities, sages, and ancient heroes with names that
could provide an etymology for the name Candella. A tribal Gond
origin is hinted at by bards and has been thought plausible by some
scholars. This may account for the origin myth, with its insistent
link to the Viṣṇu Purāṇa and correct status.
An early ancestor was the nṛpa Nannuka, who is not given
royal titles but is described as “a touchstone to test the worth of
the gold of the regal order”, and is associated with the conquest
both of territory and of princesses. Elsewhere, he is referred to
as a kṣitipā (a chief), one who excelled the heroes of old such
as Pṛthu and Kakutstha. Nannuka’s son was Vākpati, who made
the Vindhyan region his playground and sported with the Kirāta
women—perhaps the women of the forest-dwellers. This could
point to encroachments into the Vindhyan forests becoming an
important part of Jejākabhukti.
His sons were Jayaśakti and Vijayaśakti. The latter, the younger
of the two, had a son Rāhila, who succeeded and was the father of
Harṣa. Legitimation rituals are not referred to, but an allusion to
them comes from the elaborate metaphor of battle as a sacrificial
ritual. In a later inscription Rāhila is described as nṛpati (the lord
of men),26 but is not given the royal titles of an independent ruler.
This is further underlined in his being described as a skilled archer
and compared to Arjuna of the Mahābhārata. He is also said to be
a touchstone in assessing the worth of the kṣatriya order, thus stak-
ing a claim early on of the family being kṣatriya. The brāhmaṇa
origin is being added to implicitly by claiming the correct status
for royalty. His base was the region around Mahobā, the area con-
tinually associated with the Candellas, but he was presumably still
in some kind of a subordinate status to the Pratihāras.27
The next king, Harṣa, was the father of Yaśovarman and the
grandfather of Dhaṅga, the king issuing the inscription. Harṣa is
26 Stone Inscription of Dhangadeva, Ep. Ind., I, 137ff., 142, v. 21.
27 The Barah Copper-plate of Bhojadeva of ad 836 claims that the Kālañjara-
maṇḍala, later to become the core of Candella territory, was under the Pratihāras:
ibid., XIX, no. 2, 15ff.
Inscriptions as Official Histories 563
said to have married Kaṅcukā, the Rajput Cāhamāna princess, it
being specifically mentioned that both were of equal caste status
(savarṇa, v. 21). Kañcukā was the mother of Yaśovarman. The
Candellas could now insist on their kṣatriya status. The Cāhamānas
were a recognized Rajput family of high status, and the marriage
would have assisted the upward mobility of the Candella family.
This would make them kṣatriyas, moving on from being brahma-
kṣatra, so that somewhere along the line the Candellas chose to
ignore their earlier claim to brāhmaṇa origins.
With Yaśovarman, the Candellas come into their own. He is
described as a sword cutting down the creeper of the Gauḍas,
quel ling the forces of the Khasas, capturing the treasure of the
Kosalas, annihilating the warriors of Kāśmīra, emasculating the
Mithilas, coming as the god of death to the Mālavas, the bringer of
distress on the Cedis, a destructive storm to the Kurus, a scorch-
ing fire to the Gurjaras, and superior even to the heroes of the
Mahābhārata. This is an echo of Bāṇa’s description of the father
of Harṣavardhana in his Harṣacarita, a model for these later
authors. Yaśovarman’s campaign against the powerful Cedis, to
whom the Candellas were previously subordinate, is singled out
for detailed mention and has a ring of authenticity distinct from
the hyperbolic verses referring to other conquests. Yaśovarman
established himself over the Kālañjara region, possibly taken from
the Cedis. Kālañjara became a core area of the Candella domain
and great pride was attached to the title of kālañjarādhipati (Lord
of Kālañjara), taken by subsequent Candella rulers. The Kālañjara
mountain is described as so high that it impedes the progress of
the sun at midday (in fact it is only 2000 ft high). Elsewhere there
is mention of a Candella princess being given in marriage to the
Cedi royal family, which doubtless clinched the alliance. Marriages
were crucial to diplomacy and politics, especially in the quick suc-
cession of alternating friendship and enmity. Yaśovarman’s wife
was Puppā/Puṣpā, the mother of Dhaṅga, but we are not told her
family connections.
The inscription goes on to record that Yaśovarman built a
temple to Viṣṇu and installed therein a special image of the deity.
The building of a grand temple signified sovereignty and was a
statement of pre-eminence. The image is said to be old and much
564 The Past Before Us
travelled and had a history of being passed from person to person.
Its provenance was the Himalaya. Yaśovarman received it from
Devapāla, the son of Herambapāla, whose father had obtained it
from Sāhi, the rājā of Kīra, perhaps in the north-western moun-
tains, in exchange for a force of elephants and horses; he in turn
had got it from the lord of Bhoṭa (a part of Tibet), who had found
it at Kailāsa in the Himalaya. The introduction of a special image
obtained with some difficulty from a distant area is not uncon-
nected with the legitimation of power. Installing an icon of Viṣṇu
and housing it in a splendid temple would have been part of the
ritual of kingship and appreciated by the Vaiṣṇava Pañcarātra sect.
This was in lieu of the Vedic sacrificial rituals of kingship, referred
to obliquely and in passing. Viṣṇu appears to have replaced the
earlier local family deity, Maniya Deo, as part of the effort to be
acculturated to the mainstream culture. Maniya Deo, or Maniya
Devi, according to some, was said to be the special deity of the
Candellas. It was also associated with the Gonds, and continues
to be worshipped at Mahobā. The temple at Khajuraho and the
icon of Viṣṇu are symbols of the demarcation being made by a
dynasty of consequence which had moved on from its less exalted
origins.
We are told that Yaśovarman was succeeded by his son Dhaṅga,
c. 950–1003. Popular belief that he had brought the Kaliyuga to
an end, even if prematurely, was a great compliment since it was
meant to convey that dharma had returned. Given the description
of dharma as standing on one leg in the Kaliyuga, according to
Manu, this was doubtless meant as a formal endorsement of the
varṇāśramadharma and Puranic sectarian religion.
The inscription concludes with the name of its author, the poet
Mādhava, perhaps the court chronicler and son of Dedda, said
to be learned in grammar. The text was written by Jaddha from
Gauḍa, who knows the Sanskrit language and is familiar with the
work of the karaṇika (scribe). Jaddha seems to have come from a
family either resident in the east or recently migrated from there.
The date in the Vikrama era is given as 1011 (ad 953). The name
of the engraver who is described as an artisan cannot be read. It
would seem that the persons involved in composing, writing, and
engraving the text were not fully confident of their handling of
Inscriptions as Official Histories 565
Sanskrit, and therefore make a special point of mentioning their
qualification to do this, a qualification essential to appointment
at the court. Brāhmaṇas from Gauḍa also had a reputation for
scholarship. The reference to Gauḍa may suggest that the scribe
was a kāyastha, since other kāyasthas from Gauḍa are mentioned
in Candella inscriptions and they would have been the official
record-keepers. Inviting kāyasthas as professional scribes was
another indicator of an established kingdom.
That such records were conserved is clear from a later inscrip-
tion issued by Dhaṅga in 1059/ad 1001,28 and which was renewed
by a subsequent king, Jayavarmadeva, a century later, in ad 1117.
The list of earlier kings appears to have been copied from the pre-
vious inscription, but interestingly omitting Jayaśakti, an indirect
reference to a break in primogeniture. Dhaṅga’s donations read like
those of a well-established king. He had a magnificent Śiva temple
erected, designed by an architect with the non-Sanskritic name
of Chicha, and he provided residences and grants to brāhmaṇas
apart from endowments to the temples. He is compared in pass-
ing to Viṣṇu-Kṛṣṇa. Some of the statements about his conquests
read more like wishes rather than fulfilment and interestingly
include references to eastern India, the peninsula and even Siṇhala
(modern Sri Lanka). A more factual indicator is the much later
inscription of Kīrtivarman stating that in terms of armed strength
Dhaṅga had equalled the mighty Hammavīra, most likely Sabuk-
tigin, the Turkish Ghaznavid ruler making forays into northern
India at this time.
Dhaṅgadeva is referred to as kālañjarādhipati and the son of the
paramabhaṭṭāraka mahārājādhirāja parameśvara. Yaśovarmadeva
and his father in turn are also given full royal titles, reiterating
status. Part of the inscription was damaged and was therefore
rewritten in the reign of Jayavarman by the kāyastha Jayapāla of
the Gauḍa region in ad 1117. Clearly, the maintenance of histori-
cal records had priority.
Dhaṅga died by entering the Ganges when he was more than a
hundred years old. His inscription was completed by Yaśodhara,
28 Stone Inscription of Dhangadeva, renewed by Jayavarmadeva, Ep. Ind.,
I, 137.
566 The Past Before Us
a dharmādhikārin (senior minister of justice), who was also the
priest of the royal household. It was composed by the poet Rāma
the son of Balabhadra and grandson of Nandana, who was of the
Śabara-Sāvara family from Tarkārikā. Śabara is used sometimes
of brāhmaṇa families but also of some forest clans. If it was the
latter, then clearly the family had been assimilated into the culture
of the court and this particular Śabara family may well have been
of brāhmaṇa extraction—if it was linked to a land grant. The
inscription was written by the kāyastha Yaśaḥpāla and engraved
by Siṁha.
Kālañjara becomes central to Candella power, and is also seen
as such in the Turkish chronicles recording the attacks of the
Ghaznavids on various north Indian kingdoms. Forts as durgas
(capitals) were important symbols of sovereignty, included as
one of the seven limbs of statehood in Kauṭilya’s saptāṅga theory.
Kālañjarādhipati therefore becomes a regular title for the Candella
kings. Issuing inscriptions from forts also points to a particular
kind of political authority and how it was viewed. This would
suggest that the power of the later Candellas was somewhat on
the edge.
3. The Later Candellas
Later inscriptions refer to the next three rulers, Gaṇḍa, Vidyādhara,
and Vijayapāla. Given the age at which Dhaṅga died, these suc-
cessors are likely to have been elderly, with short reigns. Gaṇḍa
kept the kingdom intact. Vidyādhara was given grandiose titles
and is said to have caused the downfall of the Pratihāra king, thus
negating any suggestion of a status subordinate to the Pratihāras.
The other enemy now was Mahmud of Ghazni. A battle between
them was apparently bypassed in 1019 and the siege of Kālañjara
by Mahmud in 1022 may have been lifted after an exchange of
gifts. Inscriptions eulogize Vidyādhara’s defence of his realm. The
name Vidyādhara was associated earlier with the Meghavāhana
lineage, who were Cedis, hinting possibly at a Cedi connection,
perhaps on the maternal side.
The competition for power in Central India was now between
the Candellas, Paramāras, Cāhamānas, Kalacuri-Cedis, and
Inscriptions as Official Histories 567
Pratihāras. Juxtaposing their inscriptions is like filling the blanks
in a jigsaw puzzle to obtain a more complete picture. What is
mentioned and what is omitted in the inscriptions of each dynasty
is of interest. The Cāhamānas claim to have overrun Jejākabhukti,
but there is no hint of this in the Candella inscriptions. Was one
exaggerating a victory or the other effacing defeat? With the
frequent raids of Mahmud of Ghazni into northern India in the
early eleventh century, Turkish and Persian sources refer to local
rulers, among whom Vidyādhara was important. Vidyādhara at-
tacked the king of Kanauj who was an ally of the Ghaznavids.29
However, Candella inscriptions make only a passing reference to
the new antagonist, focusing still on neighbouring kingdoms and
their constant vacillations on the axis of power.
Vidyādhara’s son, Vijayapāla, is known from the inscriptions
of his sons and successors, Devavarman and Kīrtivarman who
are complimentary about their father. Two grants of Devavarman
have survived, both being of a village each to two brāhmaṇas. In
the second grant, given to secure merit for himself and his ances-
tors, he mentions his father and grandfather.30 The recipient, said
to be well-versed in the Vedas and the itihāsa-purāṇa, migrated
from Kumbhaṭi-bhaṭṭagrama, described as a place of brahmani-
cal learning. The king is mentioned with royal titles and the grant
dates to ad 1051.
Little else is known about Devavarman, but his younger brother
Kīrtivarman succeeded him and initiated a colateral line, the
second in the Candella dynasty. He has left many inscriptions,
apart from those issued at this time by ministers and wealthy
merchants. There might however have been a conflict over suc-
cession. Despite Devavarman’s inscriptions referring to him as
kālañjarādhipati, and his meditating at the feet of Vijayapāla, not
all Candella inscriptions mention him in the list of succession:
Kīrtivarman is often the successor to Vijaypāla.31
29 Candella Inscriptions from Mahoba, Ep. Ind., I, 217ff., 220, v. 22.
30 Indian Antiquary, 1887, XVI, 201.
31 Mau Stone Inscription of Madanavarman, Ep. Ind., I, 198, v. 7; F. Kielhorn,
“Deogarh Rock Inscription of Kirtivarman”, Indian Antiquary, 1889, XVIII,
237–9.
568 The Past Before Us
The successors however were unable to keep the power intact.
Typical of the quick turnover of centrality in the maṇḍala theory,
subordinates and overlords changed positions within a century.
The Kalacuri-Cedis were again in the ascendant and threatening
the Candellas. One inscription, although it gives Devavarman
royal titles, also describes him as mahāsāmanta-rāja-putra,
which suggests a decline or an ambiguity in status.32 The Kala-
curis are more than a threat and the fragility of Candella power
is evident.33 The news had spread at least as far south as the
Deccan, for Bilhaṇa, in the Vikramāṅkadevacarita, states that the
Kalacuri king spells death to the lord of the Kālañjara fort.34 The
inscriptions are effusive in praising Kīrtivarman for stemming the
power of the Cedis. However, there is a different take on events,
also emanating from court circles, suggesting an alternative to
the official version.
In the Prabodhacandrodaya of Kṛṣṇa Miśra, a contemporary
play performed at the court, one of the generals, Gopāla, defeats
the Cedis and restores the power of the Candella king.35 A feuda-
tory comes to the aid of the king as Gopāla is the sakala-sāmanta-
cakra-cūḍāmaṇi, the crest-jewel of the circle of sāmantas, a phrase
frequently used of important feudatories. A later inscription look-
ing back at this period associates Kīrtivarman with nutana-rājya-
sṛṣṭau, rejuvenating the kingdom, presumably defending it from
the Cedis.36 Prabodhacandrodaya was staged at the court and one
wonders how its virulent satire on Jaina and Buddhist monks was
taken by the Jaina members of the court, or whether this satire,
seemingly religious, might not have had a factional edge involv-
ing court politics given the many claims to various people having
come to the aid of the king. The satire on the heterodox includes
the Cārvākas, the philosophers of materialism.
Kīrtivarman was succeeded by his son Sallakṣanavarman, who,
in later inscriptions is described as using the booty from successful
campaigns against the Mālavas and Cedis, to ensure the welfare of
32 Charkari Plate of Devavarma, Ep. Ind., 20, 127, lines 9–10.
33 Inscription from Mahoba, ibid., I, 222, v. 22.
34 18.93.
35 Prabodhacandrodaya, iv.
36 Ibid., I, 217; Rock Inscription of Vīravarman, ibid., 327, v. 3.
Inscriptions as Official Histories 569
his subjects. His son Jayavarman ordered the rewriting of Dhaṅga’s
inscription which had been damaged, for dynastic annals had to
be conserved. Another switch to a colateral line was Jayavarman
being succeeded by Pṛthvīvarman.37 Jayavarman is said to have
taken to renunciation, implying a voluntary abdication, which
need not have been voluntary.
The inscriptions of Madanavarman (c. 1125–63), the son of
Pṛthvī varman, are often located in forts.38 This hints at the court
being somewhat beleaguered, and is known to be in conflict with
the Cedis, the Gāhaḍavālas, the Mālavas and the Caulukyas/Solaṅ-
kis of Gujarat. In one inscription certain names are omitted from
the genealogy, and one wonders if this was an attempt to change
the list of succession.39 The date is Maṅgala Caitra vadi 5, Visuva-
saṁkrānti in Vikrama Samvat 1192 = 24 March ad 1136.
In the time of Madanavarman (c. 1125–63) three grants were
made to brāhmaṇas, not all of whom were ritual specialists. Two
were exchanging their land from a previous donation to the pres-
ent location, a complex transaction carried out at the orders of
the queen and endorsed by her husband. One family came from
the bhaṭṭāgrahāra of Pāṭaliputra to the east of Jejākabhukti.40 The
grant was authorized at the assembly of the village where the land
was granted, and the assembly was to include a cross-section of
those living there, the brāhmaṇas, officials including dūtas and
scribes, cultivators, mahattaras (headmen), and then those of the
lowest castes, the medas and caṇḍālas. The order was written by
the dharmalekhin Sūḍha of the Vāstavya family (elsewhere re-
ferred to as kāyasthas), and was engraved by a ritikāra or brazier
vijñānin, Uheno. The order is addressed to the officers and to
the village assembly, which is a departure from earlier inscrip-
tions. This suggests a greater participation of local bodies and
communities. The king’s authority may not have been so effective,
despite the formulaic eulogy.
37 Mau Stone Inscription, ibid., 198, v. 12.
38 Ibid., 195.
39 Three Candella Charters, ibid., XXXII, 121, vv. 2–4.
40 The bhaṭṭāgrahāra was generally a village or a cluster of villages. It was
a settlement of learned brāhmaṇas as a rent-free holding and acquired by their
ancestors through an initial royal grant.
570 The Past Before Us
Madanavarman had a long reign, his inscriptions dating from
ad 1129 to 1163. Their locations suggest that the Candella territo-
ries were intact. That he was particular about alliances is evident
from his naming his three queens with their respective ranking.
He was also particular about the highlights of dynastic history and
states that Dhaṅga, after defeating the Pratihāra ruler of Kannauj,
attained sāmrājyam (sovereignty).41 He mentions other important
events from the past. A later inscription states that Yaśovarman II
came to the throne after Madanavarman and before Paramardideva
but had a short reign.42
The grandson of Madanavarman, Paramardideva/Paramardi-
varman, ruling from ad 1165 to 1202, took the full gamut of royal
titles: paramab haṭṭāraka-mahārājādhirāja-parameśvara-parama-
mahe śvara-śri-kālañjarādhipati-śrimanmat-paramardideva. But
no mention is made of his somewhat unhappy confrontation with
the Cāhamāna king, Pṛthvīrāja. The latter’s encroachments into
Candella territory are referred to in Cāhamāna inscriptions,43 but
little is said about this in Candella records. It would seem from
other sources that Paramardideva had recovered his territory by
1201, but was then attacked by Turkish armies under Qutb-ud-din,
soon after which he died.
The inscriptions of Paramardideva’s successor, Trailokyavarman
(c. ad 1205–41), suggest that a change of fortune had set. He takes
the predictable royal titles but there is a political uncertainty
about the content of the inscriptions, which are also far fewer.
Trailokyavarman made one grant of two villages to the son of a
brāhmaṇa rauta killed in battle against the Turuṣkas (Turks).44 The
Turks were on the doorstep of the Candellas and the confrontation
may have occurred in the last years of Paramardivarman. In an
inscription of his successor, Trailokyavarman is compared rather
poetically to Viṣṇu. Whereas the deity in his boar incarnation is
said to have lifted the earth out of the sea, Trailokyavarman is said
to have lifted the earth out of the sea of Turuṣkas, a reference to the
campaigns of the Sultans of Delhi.45 Mention of a confrontation
41 Ep. Ind., I, 197, v. 3.
42 Ibid., 212.
43 Archaeological Survey Reports, X, 2000 (rpt), 98–9; ibid., XXI, 171–4.
44 Garra Plates, ibid., XVI, 272ff.
45 Ajayagadh Rock Inscription of Vīravarman, ibid., I, 327, v. 7.
Inscriptions as Official Histories 571
with the Turks is a contrast to the silence about hostilities against
the Cāhamānas although the records of the latter make much of
it. Curiously the Turks are just another enemy at this stage. There
is no hint that they were recognized as a new presence, and the
implications of this for northern India.
Grants were issued by Trailokyavarman from his camp on
Friday 22 April and 6 May 1205, in peripheral areas of the king-
dom to the family of brāhmaṇa rautas, the last of whom was killed
in battle against the Turks.46 The brāhmaṇa rauta is now part of
the typology of brāhmaṇas.
Vīravarmadeva, his successor, made a grant to a non-brāhmaṇa
rauta for valour in a battle in ad 1254, probably against the
Cāhamānas.47 The genealogical section of this inscription tele-
scopes the earlier rulers and then mentions the names of his father,
grandfather and great-grandfather. This change in the genea-
logical style seems common to the descendents of Pṛthvīvarman.
Vīravarman faced opposition from a confederacy of intermediar-
ies in ad 1273, as mentioned in a series of brief inscriptions com-
memorating the warriors who fought for one of these rājās.
Inscriptions issued during the reign of Vīravarman’s successor
Bhojavarman (1286–9) were issued by his ministers from Ajay-
gadh and its environs. The power base appears to have made a signi-
ficant shift from Khajuraho to Kālañjara and Ajaygadh.48 Problems
with the forest-dwelling clans are mentioned going back to the
reign of his grandfather, Trailokyavarman. The officer in charge
of the Ajayagadh fort was responsible for the subjugation of the
Śabaras, Pulindas and Bhillas – the generic terms used for forest
tribes.49 The trouble now may have been caused by fresh Candella
encroachments into forest areas perhaps occasioned by a need to
clear land and settle cultivators, to increase revenue.
The last of the Candella kings was Hammīravarman (c. ad 1289–
1309). Inscriptions of this period in the name of Śrimad Hammīra-
varmadeva as kālañjarādhipati have raised the question of the
relationship of Hammīravarman to Bhojavarman, both as kin
46 Garra Plates of Trailokyavarman, ibid., XVI, 272ff., 275, vv. 9–11.
47 Charkhari Plate of Vīravarmadeva, ibid., XX, 132ff.
48 Ajayagadh Stone Inscription, ibid., XXVIII, 98–107.
49 Rock Inscription of the Time of Bhojavarman, ibid., I, 334ff., vv. 18–22.
572 The Past Before Us
and politically.50 The former does not take royal titles in these
inscriptions despite mentioning that he meditated at the feet of
Vīravarman, which was the usual formula for successors. He may
therefore have been the governor of the fort. He describes himself
as paramabhaṭṭāraka-sāhi-rājavali . . . He also gives the title of
sāhi to his predecessors three generations up, the approximate
date for when the Turks started threatening the Candella kingdom.
This new title indicates a more insistent political presence of the
Turks. The name Hammīra, fashionable in quite a few Rajput
families, is in itself a sanskritized form of the Turkish title amir.
There appears to be no stigma attached to taking the title of an
enemy: it seems to refer merely to status in a new dispensation.
The absence of the more grandiloquent titles points to a reduced
status. Interestingly, the inscription was written by the brāhmaṇa
Rāmapāla, doubtless working in some official capacity.
The firmness of the Candella genealogy now wavered and
started later than in the early records. Hammīravarman’s reign
sees an increase in the number of satī memorial inscriptions from
1304.51 One of them states, “samvat 1366 (ad 1309) of the village
of Baliakhera in the time of Alayadina Sultana who is ruling.” This
was the Sultan Allah-ud-din, confirmed by Persian chronicles as
well. Two others probably refer to the wives of his feudatories.
In a grant of a village to two brāhmaṇas, he again takes the title
sāhi. This seems rather ironic since he was unable to withstand the
attack of the Turks. The termination of the inscriptions marks the
effective termination of this dynasty. That memories, traditions,
and possibly even claims to Candella descent continued is appar-
ent from the bardic epics.
There seem to have been some claimants to minor branches of
the family ruling at Kālañjara and Mahobā. These feature in the
later composition of the bards. The rājā of Kālañjara was killed
in battle against Sher Shah in 1545, and at about the same time
the daughter of the Candella rājā of Mahobā married into the
Gond ruling family at Garh Mandla. The Candellas were either
50 Charkhari Plates, ibid., XX, 134–6.
51 Ibid., XX, 134; Mahoba Plates of Parmardideva, ibid., XVI, 10–11.
Inscriptions as Official Histories 573
so reduced in status that they were willing to marry into a tribal
Gond family, or the Gonds had so improved their status that they
could marry into a kṣatriya family; or else there was some truth
in the tradition that the Candellas were in origin a Gond clan and
therefore the marriage was acceptable.
Reading the inscriptions sequentially thus provides an effective
narrative of the history of the Candella rulers.
4. Inscriptions of Administrators
and Intermediaries
The writing of history in the form of inscriptions was not limited to
dynasties. The recognition of history as a stamp of authority meant
that people of wealth and status maintained family histories. The
completeness of such histories depended on whether the family
wanted such a record. They vary, therefore, from those that are
issued by the same family—their information extending to almost
the entire period of the dynasty—to others that are single lengthy
inscriptions, containing data on the family.
Inscriptions in Jejākabhukti intended as a form of historical
writing were composed by those associated with governance
and political authority, apart from those by kings. Although these
inscriptions are fewer and not so fulsome, the intention is the
same. Among them some were issued by powerful families of
ministers and administrators, brāhmaṇa and kāyastha; some by
śreṣṭhins (wealthy merchants) associated with the court who were
often members of the Jaina community; and some by the sāmantas
serving the Candellas. These were all groups that had access to
literacy, economic resources, and the makings of an upper-caste
identity. Their records begin in the middle period of Candella rule,
when it was doing well, and continue even to when the kingdom
was in decline, but such groups continued to prosper. It is also
striking that their records from an earlier period are re-engraved
when they are damaged, as in the case of an inscription at a Jaina
temple.
Pre-eminent among brāhmaṇa administrators was the fami ly
of Gadādhara, serving the Candella kings since the reign of
574 The Past Before Us
Dhaṅga.52 The inscription is issued during the reign of Madana-
varman and therefore covers a large span of Candella rule. The
format parallels that of royal inscriptions, with some differences.
The family came from Gauḍa, which gave them a high status. It
claims descent from Aṅgirasas (the brāhmaṇas associated with
the Bhṛgus and the historical tradition) and later with Gautama
Akṣapāda, linked with the philosophical school of Nyāya. The
more immediate ancestor was Prabhāsa. The family members
were ministers to the Candella kings with whom their genealogy
is correlated with reigning kings.
Statements of the royal inscriptions are generally confirmed.53
The acts of piety of Gadādhara and his brothers are mentioned and
credit is also taken by the ministerial family for the eminence of
the Candellas. The ministerial succession lists generations with a
concern for accurate history.
Another inscription mentions one Puruṣottama as the man-
trimukhya (chief minister) of Paramardideva. He succeeded his
father in office, as recorded in an inscription in 1195.54 Once again,
the genealogy of the dynasty is correlated with that of the minis-
ter’s family, although this time it is telescoped and relatively brief.
The royal genealogy is traced back to Atri and Candrātreya and
then jumps to Madanavarman, Yaśovarman II and Paramardideva.
The genealogy of the ministerial family claims to belong to the
well-known brāhmaṇa Vasiṣṭha gotra. The inscription interest-
ingly was composed by Devadhara, a son of Gadādhara, who was
the sāndhivigrahika of Paramardideva. It was written by another
of his sons, Dharmadeva. In one grant the land already granted
to a Buddhist monastery is excluded.55 This is the only passing
mention of a grant to a Buddhist institution.
Among other powerful families of administrators the Vāstavya
kāyastha caste of scribes were also marking their presence. Given
the demand for literate officers at the many royal courts, there was
not only mobility but competition among those who could function
52 Mau Stone Inscription of Madanavarman, Ep. Ind., I, 197ff., vv. 17–45.
53 Ibid., XXXII, 118.
54 Batesvar Stone Inscription, ibid., I, 207ff.
55 F. Kielhorn, “Ichchhawar Plates of Parmardideva”, 205ff.; Ep. Ind., XVI,
9; ibid., X, 44ff.; ibid., XX, 128.
Inscriptions as Official Histories 575
as administrators. Their ambiguous caste status in brahmanical
social codes may have encouraged them when acquiring office
to insist on recording their origins and history as an assertion
of identity. This may have been partly conditioned by the many
branches of the kāyastha caste that had become powerful in the
administration of contemporary kingdoms.
Such inscriptions carry a reference to a past which almost
anticipates their present status.56 The authority of the kāyasthas
increased with the decline in royal power. Therefore, their in-
scriptions tend to belong to the late period of Candella rule. An
early reference to the Vāstavya kāyasthas comes in an inscription
of Kīrtivarman in the eleventh century.57 Ancestry moves from
deity to mythical beings to humans, a pattern resembling the royal
inscriptions and the Puranic vaṃśānucarita, reflecting a recogni-
tion of the historical tradition.
About a century later, an inscription links the name Vāstavya
to a town or a cluster of thirty-six settlements,58 indicating that
they were a caste of urban professionals. The omission of deity
and sage would suggest a confidence in their established status
as administrators.
An inscription in the Kalacuri-Cedi kingdom dating to 1249
provides an origin myth of the kāyasthas.59 It is said that a learned
sage Kācara was born from Śiva and embellished the town of
Kulāñcā. A śūdra propitiated him on the Gaṅgā and the sage
granted him a boon that his son would be the founder of the
kāyastha caste, so called because of the innumerable merits of
his kāyā (body). Despite his śūdra origin, the author elsewhere
in the inscription makes a claim to being twice-born. Providing
the genealogy of the ministers signifies a change in political
functioning and is a comment on royal power, with the ministers
becoming more important than before. The fact of kāyasthas being
ministers meant that they were now more than just a professional
caste. Power is shared to some extent, even if in theory it is held
56 K.K. Shah, “Self-Legitimation and Social Primacy: A Case Study of Some
Kāyastha Inscriptions from Central India”, 857–66.
57 Ajaygadh Rock Inscription, Ep. Ind., XXX, no. 17, 87ff.
58 Rock Inscription of Bhojavarman, ibid., I, 330.
59 Rewah Stone Inscription of the Time of Karṇa, ibid., XXIV, 101ff.
576 The Past Before Us
by the king and his family, as suggested by parallel genealogies
of the ruling family and ministers.
Nevertheless the genealogies indicate differences. The brāhm aṇa
Gadādhara establishes his credentials as a man of learning by
claiming descent from a well-known philosopher, as well as his
knowledge of texts on polity and theories on good government.
The reference was to a family which had controlled ministerial
offices over at least five generations, and so doubtless formed an
authoritative faction at court. The kāyasthas claim almost secular
origins in later inscriptions, but mention the help they gave to
the kings in times of trouble. This is a different kind of historical
connection with the dynasty.
Others with access to wealth and standing also maintained
historical records and updated them. Inscriptions were conserved
as historical and administrative documents. Earlier inscriptions
were read for reference, as is evident from an inscription of an
important dignitary at the Jaina temple at Khajuraho.60 It records
the donation of gardens by a Jaina merchant, Pāhilla, who is said
to have been held in honour by Dhaṅga. These donations point
to Khajuraho being not only a royal centre but also the focus of
wealthy merchants. The proximity to the royal temples points to
their patrons being persons of consequence. Among them, the
Grahapati family is particularly generous. The original inscrip-
tion recording the grant and dated to 955, was re-engraved in a
subsequent century from an earlier copy which had doubtless been
kept as a legal document—an instance of historical documentation
exemplified through the medium of inscriptions.
Another history of a merchant family is recorded in an ins-
cription of ad 1001 at a temple donated by the Grahapati family,
whose parentage and kinsmen are mentioned.61 The history of this
merchant family surfaces again during the reign of Madanavarman
in 1147, when the illustrious Panidhara of the Grahapati family is
described as a śreṣṭhin.62 Whereas earlier the family was linked
60 Inscription from a Jaina temple, ibid., I, 136.
61 Stone inscription of Kokkala, ibid., 147ff.
62 Three Inscriptions from Images in the Jaina Temples at Khajuraho, ibid.,
I, 152ff.
Inscriptions as Official Histories 577
to the building of a Śaiva temple, now the donation is to images
in a Jaina temple, wealthy merchants frequently being patrons of
the Jainas.
Inscriptional records of sāmantas were to be expected. There
are grants by one of Trailokyavarman’s feudatories, dating to
ad 1240. The mahāraṇaka Kumārapāladeva refers to the king as
the overlord who is given the same titles as the earlier Kalacuri-
Cedi overlord.63 Elaborate titles are not just extravaganza but
claims to victories over specific enemies. The erstwhile feudatories
of the Cedis, when integrated into the Candella domain, incorpo-
rate elements of Cedi titles into the lengthy compound title that
they now give to their Candella overlord. These include, apart
from the others, vāmadevapādānudhyāta and tṛkaliṅgādhipati. The
latter is rhetorical since the Candellas did not conquer Kaliṅga,
but the message to the person reading the grant would clearly state
that it reflected Candella overlordship over the Cedis, particularly
if the grant was in erstwhile Cedi territory. The feudatory in ques-
tion appears to have been a minister under the Cedis who had
transferred his loyalty to the Candella king. His title is hereditary
as his father was the mahāraṇaka Harirāja.
Another inscription records the mortgage of a village pledged
by a Śaiva guru to a brāhmaṇa raṇaka.64 The execution of the deed
is witnessed by seven persons listed in an official capacity. There
is also a quotation from Dandin’s Kāvyadarśa, doubtless to make
the point that the composer of the epigraph was a literary man.
The village was located in what was erstwhile Kalacuri-Cedi ter-
ritory and the Cedi era is used, although the overlord mentioned
is Trailokyavarman, an indication that this was contested territory.
The excessive use of royal titles is in imitation of the Cedi style
but includes, strangely enough, kānyakubjādhipati, normally the
title of the Pratihāras of Kānyakubja/Kanauj. The same style is
continued in inscriptions recording grants made by mahāraṇakas
(feudatory lords). The mahāraṇakas provide their own genealo-
gies, with only a mention of the Candella king.
63 F. Kielhorn, “Four Rewa Copper Plate Inscriptions”, Indian Antiquary,
XVII, 224–36.
64 Rewa Plates, Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, IV, 37ff.
578 The Past Before Us
These major inscriptions constitute the records of a history of
the Candella dynasty and some influential families of that time.
The earliest inscriptions on stone are largely statements of kings
and are located at or close to the temples of the reigning kings at
Khajuraho. The information they carry incorporates their version
of Candella history. Khajuraho marks the establishment of the
Candella kingdom. From the reign of Madanavarman, inscrip-
tions are more frequently linked to the fort at Kālañjara, which
seems to have superseded Khajuraho in political importance, as
also the fort at Ajaygadh. That both were forts points to the more
threatened existence of the later kings.
The inscriptions of Kīrtivarman were issued from various
places other than Khajuraho, and even when in camp. The place
from where the order was issued would also have a meaning.
Focal points of administration and control seem to have gradu-
ally become more extensive and there is considerable activity
among ministers, śreṣṭhins, and kāyasthas. Patterns of patronage
to various religious sects are also statements of wealth, authority,
and status.
Brāhmaṇa donees coming from bhaṭṭāgrahāras in Pāṭaliputra
and further east migrated from Magadha and Gauḍa attracted
by both designations of ṭhakkura and rauta as well as the gift of
land. For those making the gift the intention was to be included
in the cultural circuit of the Sanskritized elite. This was defined
in the more powerful kingdoms as the culture of the court and
the agrahāras, the mārga culture differentiated from the deśi. The
poor quality of the language of some inscriptions betrays the
inaccessibility of Sanskritic culture to all those seeking it. These
compositions suggest that some kāyasthas and śreṣṭhins moved
from fairly humble beginnings to exalted positions. The claim to
being skilled allows some to take the epithet of vijñānin—not just
skilled but knowledgeable. Both brāhmaṇas and kṣatriyas have
the designations rauta and ṭhakkura. In one case the grandfather
was a dīkṣitar and the family appear to have moved from priestly
functions to administrative office. As recipients of office and
holders of grants of land, brāhmaṇas, kāyasthas, and śreṣṭhins
were moving into a cultural circle which attempted to diffuse a
Sanskritic culture but not invariably with impressive results.
Inscriptions as Official Histories 579
5. The Voice of the Bard
Inscriptions are the texts of official history, representing the view
of royalty or of other people of status and authority. There is,
however, another perspective on such persons, particularly the
rulers, which differs from the official. It is not as consistently
available as the inscriptions, but where it is present it forms a
counterpart to the formal view. This is the bardic tradition, to
which I have referred earlier (chapter 2) as constituting a third
substratum tradition for much of Indian history, and it continues
to this day, though now fading out. In its later manifestation in
the second millennium ad, it is often literature from the subaltern
or subordinate perspective—the view of those who occasionally
might have participated in court activities or fancied themselves
doing so, but essentially were at a distance. Its initial oral com-
positions were worked over by literate authors and this changed
their intention and function.
Some well-established families, such as those of the sāmantas,
maintained bards who kept a record of their genealogies and prop-
erty rights. This was another mark of status and remained so until
a few decades ago.65 When the sāmanta became a mahārāja, the
bard could also move up in status but was overshadowed by the
scribe and the brāhmaṇa rājaguru who authored the inscriptions
and the chronicles, which were regarded as the more impressive
historical documents, either shorn of the paraphernalia of forms
of legitimation or else given an alternative source of legitimacy.
Where the bardic narrative is a different one, it is often serving
an alternative claim to authority and status. The alternative claims
may be from co-lateral lineages of the royal family, or may be
rival claims. In bardic epics, royal families are not too far away
from their actual origins.
65 Families of the dominant castes were patrons of the pāṇḍās, priests-cum-
genealogists residing in places of pilgrimage—such as Pushkar, Hardwar,
Mattan—who were visited by members of these families on special occasions,
such as a marriage, the birth of a son, or the death of an elder, or whenever a
special rite had to be performed. The pāṇḍās performed the rituals and updated
the records. On their annual brief visits to the families they served, the pāṇḍās
received hospitality and again updated the records.
580 The Past Before Us
Because of the accessibility of the bards to the public, these
compositions were likely to have been familiar to people outside
the court. This is suggested by the reappearance of bardic epics
composed on a range of rulers from the second millennium ad,
whom we know of from inscriptions and sometimes chronicles.
The perspective of the bard provides a different representation and
its juxtaposition with inscriptions adds to the diversity in histori-
cal awareness. Calling it the voice of the bard, which makes it the
voice of the other, is therefore to underline the contrasting form
of the two historical traditions.
Epic poems have a long life as recitations of oral poetry before
they are recorded in written form. This gives them a structure and
content. Small incidents and lesser people ignored in the official
version are filled out in lengthy descriptions. This is in part a
facility of the oral form. The epic claims historicity but is not too
concerned with ensuring it, and therefore it frequently lapses. Its
importance lies in providing a perspective, sometimes even an
alternative one, arising from popular perceptions of events and
persons. Of the three categories of texts that represent historical
writing in this period, epics have some affinity with the vaṃśāvalīs,
but remain distinct as they do not reflect the vision of the court—
as do the chronicles.
The poems of the bards focused on local heroes. They reflect
the perceptions of groups of a lower status, those from whom the
king had demarcated himself in the inscriptions. They were the
protectors of the local people. Popular perception saw the local
heroes as the defenders of the state, probably because the bards
with whom this tradition lay had greater access to these families
than to those of the ministers and royalty.
Material on the Candella dynasty is included marginally in the
well-known epic poem on the Cāhamāna Rajputs, the Pṛthvīrāja-
rāsau of Chand Bardai. There is a debate as to whether the seg-
ment referred to as the Mahobā-khaṇḍa was originally a part of
the Pṛthvīrāja-rāsau or whether it began as an independent com-
position, the Parmāl-rāsau, and was later incorporated into the
Pṛthvīrāja-rāsau.66 The date is also uncertain. The epic in its
66 M.V. Pandia and S.S. Das (eds), The Pṛthvīrāja Rāsau of Chand Bardai;
Inscriptions as Official Histories 581
pre sent form is thought to be of the sixteenth or seventeenth cen-
tury, although it refers back to events four centuries earlier, when
it may have been composed in its original form. Written in support
of the Cāhamānas, it touches on their conflict with later Candella
kings and, not unexpectedly, differs from the official history of the
Candellas as given in their inscriptions. This conflict becomes part
of the Pṛthvīrāja-rāsau, as indeed of other bardic compositions
of the area, such as the Ālhā Rāso of Jagnaik Rao.
Parts of the oral epic were rendered into Sanskrit and, with
additional narratives, formed a section of the Bhaviṣya Purāṇa.
Inducting it into the Puranic tradition would have given it greater
credibility for a general audience. Reincarnating the Mahābhārata
heroes into folk heroes was an appropriation of the established
epic to give status to a new one, thought to be politically and so-
cially significant, and to link it to the old, seen as a precursor.67
The local epic of heroes linked to Āhir and Banaphar origins
drew on the Mahābhārata to claim Sanskritic sanction, and the
Bhaviṣya Purāṇa legitimized the sanction by incorporating the
local epic. The Bhaviṣya Purāṇa then projects it primarily as a
con flict between the Cāhamānas and the Candellas. A small part
of this history thus finds its way into a ritual text, although the
larger part was free of this connection. The oral version remained
independent.
The Mahobā-khaṇḍa relates the history of three dynasties—the
Goda, Gahirawar, and Candel—of which the last is the main one.
Could the reference to these three be to the Gonds, Gāhaḍavālas,
and Candellas, suggesting that the original rulers were Gond
and that the Gāhaḍavāla and Candella were later but connected?
The narrative begins with the story of the founder of the dynasty,
Candravarman. The Cāhamānas/Cauhānas are given a higher
status since they are said to be among the Agnikula, the four pre-
eminent clans whose ancestors arose out of the sacrificial fire of a
sage.68 The Candellas are not of the same rank. The origin of the
S.S. Das (ed.), Parmāl Rāsau, 2507–615; S.K. Mitra, The Early Rulers of
Khajuraho, 14ff.
67 A. Hiltebeitel, Rethinking India’s Oral and Classical Epics, 123–8.
68 J. Tod, Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan, vol. I, 112–13.
582 The Past Before Us
Candellas in this source involves a brāhmaṇa ancestry but
hardly a respectable one. The Tomara Rajput king Ānaṅgapāla, to
whom the bard is said to be reciting the story, is puzzled over how
a kṣatriya can be born of a brāhmaṇa, and that too of a widow,
which would normally have made him low caste. However, the
association of brāhmaṇas with kṣatriya functions was not new
and the category of brahma-kṣatra may have taken care of such
anomalies.
The story goes that Hemarāja, the purohita to Indrajit Gahirwar,
has a beautiful daughter, Hemavatī, who is unfortunately widowed
at the early age of 16 because of Indra’s curse. On a hot summer
night, when she goes to bathe in a pool, she is seen by the Moon-
god (Candra) who, impassioned, spends the night with her. She,
not knowing who he is but fearful of the consequences, threatens
to curse him. Whereupon the Moon-god predicts that a son will be
born to her, Candravarman or Candra-brahma, who will be a king.
He will go to Khajjūrapura where he will perform yajñas and give
gifts in charity, he will reign in Mahobā and build tanks, temples,
and a fort at Kālañjara; and furthermore he will be a kṣatriya of
the highest order. That the Moon-god had to predict his high status
suggests the lowness of his actual status. The qualifications of
being accepted as a kṣatriya seem to have changed. They have less
to do with birth and more with performing sacrifices, and with
building tanks, temples, and forts.
Hemavatī comes to Kālañjara, where she stays with the family
of the village headman and gives birth to a son. His status is
conceded by his not being born in the forest but in the home of
a functionary. This is emphasized by the Moon-god holding a
festival in his honour, by Bṛhaspati writing his horoscope, and by
the apsarās celebrating his birth. Candravarman is blessed by a
variety of gods. His father gives him a touchstone—a pragmatic
understanding of the need for wealth in order to establish a king-
dom! He accumulates wealth through using the touchstone and
occupies Kālañjara, conquers the neighbouring area, and founds
a ruling family. (The frequency of conquest in the establishing of
power would suggest that acculturation often tended to be con-
frontational as the new status would have to be accepted by erstwhile
Inscriptions as Official Histories 583
peer groups.) He makes a gift of a hundred crores of gold coins
to brāhmaṇas and ṛṣis: this would have silenced aspersions on
his origin. He establishes a kingdom largely at the expense of
the Gahirwars, who flee to Kāśī (suggesting that the author may
have intended them to be identified with the Gāhaḍavālas). Can-
dravarman then comes to Khajuraho, invokes Viśvakarman, with
whose help eighty-five temples are constructed, each with a pool
and a garden, and he gifts vast amounts to brāhmaṇas. He builds
a new capital at Mahobā, thus fulfilling the prophecy of his father.
The story suggests the manner in which an ambitious son of a
court appointee could start founding a small kingdom.
We then come to the central focus which involves the Cāhamāna
king Pṛthvīrāja and the Candella king Paramardideva, known in
this poem as Parmāl. Pṛthvīrāja abducts the princess of Sameta. On
his way home some of his wounded soldiers take refuge in Parmāl’s
garden but are killed by Parmāl’s guards. Therefore, Pṛthvīrāja
takes revenge by killing the valiant Malkhan, who was defend-
ing the territory of the Candellas, and moves on to lay siege to
Mahobā. Parmāl, largely at the instigation of his queen Mālandevī,
requests a truce which is granted. The queen had wanted time
to send for the local heroes, Ālhā and his brother Ūdal. In these
narratives the queens play a more central role than in the courtly
literature.
The story of Ālhā and Ūdal, which is at the core of the epic,
intro duces another dimension where the perspective is yet more
localized. The two brothers were Banaphar Rajputs, therefore
of a lower standing than the Candellas, and held the territory of
Kālañjara. In this account, it has no links with the Kalacuri-Cedis,
perhaps because the link, having been tenuous, was no longer re-
membered. Intrigue involving some kinsmen of Parmāl led to the
brothers having to leave Mahobā and Kālañjara and take refuge
with the Gāhaḍavāla ruler Jayacanda in Kanauj. The Candella
queen recognized the worth of the brothers, and sent the Candella
bard Jagnaik to Kanauj to persuade them to return. Ālhā argued
that the Candellas were ungrateful, listing the many battles he had
fought for them but with no recognition in return. But eventually
the brothers were persuaded by their mother to return to Mahobā.
584 The Past Before Us
The Candellas, from this account, had a bard at court to record
their history in addition to their issuing inscriptions, and he also
carried messages to other courts, as was expected of bards.
A prolonged battle was then fought and Pṛthvīrāja eventu-
ally captured Mahobā. Parmāl’s army of 100,000 led by his son
Brahmānand and by one of his Pathan generals, Talhan Khan,
was routed. Ūdal and Brahmānand were killed and Ālhā retired
to the forest with his guru Gorakhanātha, a peripatetic teacher
of the highly popular Nātha cult of northern India. Mahobā and
Kālañjara were sacked, Parmāl was captured but eventually
rescued by Indal, the son of Ālhā, only to die later in Kālañjara.
Pṛthvīrāja appointed Pajjan Rai as the thānāpati (officer in charge)
of Mahobā, but the son of Parmāl, Samarjit, with the help of Jaya-
canda, retook Mahobā and installed himself as king. These events
are not mentioned in the official inscriptions possibly because it
would have been too embarrassing, or else they were contested.
Chand Bardai was a spokesman for the Cāhamānas and would
therefore have depicted Paramardideva in poor light.
Connections with local tribes such as the Gonds are implied
in this text, which places the Candellas at a lower social level
than the Cāhamānas. Perhaps the later hostility between the two
kingdoms accounted for this. Chand Bardai states that the Candel-
las worshipped Maniya Devī, a Gond cult deity installed at their
capital. In the Puranic version she is linked to the goddess Śāradā.
This would suggest the upgrading of the family’s deity from an
original clan deity to one that could now be worshipped as a royal
deity. This was legitimation from below, where the benefit to the
Candellas would be a large catchment area of the cult which would
now support the dynasty. It also registered the continuity of the
family deity, although in a changed form.
The bardic tradition was not necessarily consistent in its view
of the same events. Each bard was loyal to his patron, so versions
differed. Thus, a different version from the above comes in the
Ālhā-khaṇḍa, composed as part of an oral tradition and written
from the perspective of the Candellas. It is a counterpoint to Chand
Bardai and is attributed to Jagnaik, the bard of the Candellas, also
said to be Parmāl’s sister’s son. The various versions of the epic
Inscriptions as Official Histories 585
were sought to be collated a few centuries later, and this is what
is generally referred to as the epic.69
It was unusual for a Rajput of the ruling caste to take on the
pro fession of a bard. Here it seems acceptable because of their
initial lower-caste rank. Their own loyal supporters, such as the
hero Ālhā, had an Āhir connection which is still lower and which
is commented upon and made an issue of in the poem. Ālhā and
Ūdal as Banaphar Rajputs are the heroes but are not recognized
as full-fledged kṣatriyas. It is their heroism that establishes them
as warriors rather than their birth. The Ālhā-khaṇḍa is staking
the claim of those of lesser caste status not only to be heroes but
to be greater heroes than the higher-caste Rajputs. The social
tensions glossed over in the official version are much clearer
in the version of the bards, even if there are discrepancies of
chronology and event. The area covered in the epic was broadly
that of the Candella kingdom and the events concern the last few
rulers. Was the bardic composition intended as an alternative to
the inscriptions?
The version in the Ālhā-khaṇḍa differs from both the official
Candella history as well as that of Chand Bardai and only some
minimal events are similar. Many events take place before the
major one of the battle between Parmāl and Pṛthvīrāja. Parmāl
sends the bard Jagnaik to persuade Ālhā to return, which he does
eventually. (Thus the author of the poem also participates in the
events, a situation not dissimilar from that of Vyāsa and Vālmīki
in the earlier epics.) In this version Ālhā is the hero, defeating
Pṛthvīrāja and forcing him back to Delhi while Parmāl reigns from
Mahobā. Much of the poem is taken up with narratives involving
local families, marriages, and the collecting of revenue on be-
half of the overlord, as well as other stock-in-trade folk legends.
Marriages and battles seem to go hand-in-hand since the stake in
the first is control over women which determines caste ranking,
69 W. Waterfield, The Lay of Alha. The text was collected from variant versions
by a number of bards, and this compilation dates to the nineteenth century. One
may therefore expect interpolations and recognize that the text is not close to
the period it describes. It is looking at the history of a few centuries ago. The
translation is from Bundeli Hindi.
586 The Past Before Us
kinship rights and status. Despite the grandeur of Khajuraho the
bard sees the decline of Candella power whittled down to the
location of Mahobā, from where they originated. Descriptions of
events become a comment on the behaviour of the elite.
The hero frequently calls upon Maniya Devī for help. She is
now addressed by a properly Sanskritic name, as the goddess
Śāradā, but retains a skull as a drinking vessel. The transition from
an aniconic cult deity to a Puranic-type goddess follows a recog-
nizable pattern.
The Parimāl-rāsau and the Ālhā-khaṇḍa are narratives of the
decline of the Candellas. This possibly accounts in part for royalty
being seen as more accessible, but at the same time dependent on
local heroes, for it is the Banaphar Rajputs and not the high-rank-
ing kṣatriyas who are the heroes. These divergences of perspective,
when seen in the broader context of the similarity of the general
pattern in such compositions, would suggest that their authors were
aware that they were reconstructing a past which had undergone
change, that their reconstructions differed from the others, and that
they understood the meaning of the alternative patterns.
The epics provide the subaltern history which may or may not
coincide with the events narrated in the official dynastic history.
They have to be assessed as complementing the latter or even
providing counterparts. History constructed on the basis of ins-
criptions goes back to earlier inscriptions for information or for
cross-checking data. Epic compositions are dependent on memory
and poets can only cross-check with each other’s compositions.
The authenticity of the bardic version is weakened by the dis -
tance in time. Even if the claim is that the original epic was com-
posed at a time contemporary with the events, interpolations of
later times introduced changes, and this was easier in the oral
tradition. Changing the contents of an engraving on stone and
copper required the forging of a new inscription.
The epic of the bard reflected the perspective of those who were
creating, remembering, and reconstructing the past from a differ-
ent social perspective, that of lower-status clans and intermediaries
who were wooed by royalty but who had their own priorities. The
audience was the local community. A discrepancy would doubtless
lead to each accepting its own version, although it is likely that
some concession might have been made to the official version.
Inscriptions as Official Histories 587
6. Inscriptions as Annals
Inscriptions, when taken as annals, require an enquiry not only into
authorship and intention but also into whether they constitute his-
torical writing. Do they present a narrative of events and persons
in sequential order, and is this narrative broadly corroborated in
other sources? Are the complexities of the state and changes in this
reflected when referring to the past? Does the explanation for the
cause of an event provide a viable understanding of the event?
There has been much discussion on varieties of states in the
post-Gupta period, the most extensive of these being whether these
were feudal states. Some have argued for a period of Indian feudal-
ism, whereas others have suggested degrees of change alternative
to a feudal form. This has raised issues of how Rajput states, in
particular, came into being through processes of what have been
called integrated polities.70 Others have suggested state systems
which attempt to balance political and ritual authorities, with the
former declining in areas distant from the centre of power. This
idea draws on an argument that brāhmaṇa bureaucrats were es-
sentially functioning as ritual specialists, an argument difficult to
sustain. The inscriptions make it evident that their ritual functions
were often largely only in name, if at all, when they and their de-
scendants became administrators and landed intermediaries, and
began founding kingdoms. Where the grandfather was a dīkṣitar,
his grandsons were rautas and ṭhakkuras.
Of the earlier theories concerning the state, the saptāṅga is
referred to in passing in the inscriptions.71 Although the con-
stituents remain the same as in the kingdoms of the pre-Gupta
period, each plays a more complex role and the interface varies.
The svāmi (king) is now the focus of power, although his authority
may have become more precarious—hence the taking of exagge-
rated titles. Rāṣtra (territory) is more precisely defined, in part
because the competition over it has more contenders. The amātya
(administrators) drew on specially appointed officers but also
on intermediaries and feudatories who participated in the upper
70 H. Kulke (ed.), The State in India, 1000–1700; B.D. Chattopadhyaya, The
Making of Early Modern India.
71 Mau Stone Inscription of Madanavarman, Ep. Ind., I, 198, v. 8.
588 The Past Before Us
bureaucracy. This, in part, made alliances somewhat uncertain.
Replenishing the kośa (treasury) meant an extension of agriculture
and commerce, and therefore clearing more land and safeguard-
ing routes. A frequency of campaigns as an additional source of
revenue, bringing booty to the victor, may have contributed to
economic improvement to a greater degree than has been noticed
so far. However, frequent campaigns also consumed revenue. This
frequency led to more activity in the military camps, with the
durga being either a city or a fort. The capital city became increas-
ingly the focus of ritual and courtly culture, with the fort becoming
the retreat in troubled times.
In some ways the theory of maṇḍala becomes more relevant
in the period after the eighth century ad, with the continual rise
and decline of intermediaries aspiring to royal power. The theory
visualizes alliances as a series of circles in a situation of ambitious
small kingdoms. The pattern need not be literally applicable, but
represent a justification for hostility, especially when asserting
independence could resort to the theory. In Candella history the
tilting, as reflected in the inscriptions, was with the Pratihāras and
the Cedis, whereas in the bardic epics it was with the Cahāmānas
and the Gāhaḍavālas, before the Turks entered the scene. The cen-
trality of the king emerges from the titles which he takes and which
are also given on occasion to previous kings of the dynasty—if it
is thought that they were significant. This is usually accompanied,
as we saw, by the claim to being of the kṣatriya varṇa.
The audience for the inscriptions was extensive: the royal
court and persons from other contemporary courts, officials con-
cerned with the administration involved in the royal statement,
religious sects being assisted in the case of a grant, and the local
community in the area of the grant—defined at least in theory as
including everyone from the highest official to the caṇḍāla. The
formation of a state involves all levels of a society since it breaks
existing systems and creates new ones. The consciousness of the
past legitimizing the present was therefore not to be dismissed.
The encapsulation of history was either publicly displayed on a
monument, such as a temple wall, or else as a copper-plate when
it was kept with a family, but was recorded in the court and was
doubtless discussed. In the case of the former it could be read by,
Inscriptions as Official Histories 589
or to, the many who visited the temple as public space, thereby
reiterating history as narrated in the inscription. This would be
consulted by later authors and would also feed into the popular
perceptions of the bards. The inheritors of the property given in
the copper-plate charter would recall the history of the grantor
and their own history on reading the inscription. The official past
was public knowledge and remained so over the generations,
even when the dynasty had become a memory. It was open to the
comments of the elite—the sāmantas, śreṣṭhins, kāyasthas, brāh-
maṇas—who were participating in the process.
The king’s centrality is encapsulated in the praśasti and filled
out with the dynastic genealogy suggesting that they were giving
recognition to Puranic history which is projected as hegemonic.72
What was hegemonic was the vaṃśānucarita section, perhaps not
intrinsic to the Purāṇa anyway, and relevant to the praśasti.
Legitimacy for the dynasty required, among other things, that
it be linked to the genealogical origins preferably as given in the
vaṃśānucarita, or from any other equally acceptable source, such
as the Agnikula. Genealogies could be fabricated if required,
linking the dynasty to an appropriate descent group. Those that
provided such links would be duly recompensed, perhaps with a
grant of land. Gifts could be preceded by sacrificial rituals claim-
ing a history from earliest times. Other forms of recompense,
such as the mahādānas (high-value gifts), are also mentioned,
but grants of land would be preferred, for obvious reasons. The
Candella inscriptions have fewer references to mahādānas as
compared to land grants.
Inscriptions increase after Yaśovarman, coinciding with their
taking the normal royal titles but also that of kālañjarādhipati,
which becomes a marker of Candella power. They also take fancy
royal titles which are a contrast to the simple earlier ones of rājā,
nṛpa, bhūpati, kṣitipati, mahipati, kṣitidharatilakaḥ, the mark of
the supporter of the earth, nṛpakulatilakaḥ, the mark of the family
of kings, and so on. The more fancy titles become rhetorical when
the later and lesser kings insist on using them. Taking grandiose
72 Daud Ali, “Royal Eulogy as World History: Rethinking Copper-plate
Inscriptions in Cola India”, 165–225.
590 The Past Before Us
titles signals the centrality of the historical self-perception of the
rulers, and it coincides with another statement of status, that of
building royal temples.
The territorial base of the kingdom was the area of Khajuraho,
hence the cluster of temples. The emphasis is on a centralized
control emanating from an area where power was concentrated.
When this begins to weaken there is more than one area associated
with the focus of governance, hence the issuing of inscriptions
from Kālañjara and Ajaygadh.
The officials more frequently mentioned in the inscriptions
were the senior ministers such as the mantrīmukhya and the saciva,
some of whom made their own grants. The Vāstavya kāyasthas
were not indigenous to Jejākabhukti and had migrated from east-
ern India, suggesting a caste network of professionals proficient in
administration across northern India. This would encourage some
uniformity in format and style of the inscriptions as records of
history, and the relevance of the history recorded.
The ideology for sustaining a monarchy was provided by brah-
manical support. Some brāhmaṇas were locals, others were invited
to settle, constituting many new categories. A few continued to be
śrotriya (learned brāhmaṇas). More frequent mention is made of
brāhmaṇa rautas and ṭhakkuras, whose concerns were primarily
political and administrative. Ritual specialists were called to divert
the ill effects of an eclipse or other such untoward happenings, or
perform the ceremonial rites.They received grants of land from
the king but did not necessarily serve him in any official capacity
at the court.They propagated the virtues of kingship, especially
in areas where it was new.
They would be agents for the spread of brahmanic culture
but not averse to incorporating non-brahmanic cultures if this
enhanced their authority and prestige, assisted by the mutation of
forest-dwelling clans into castes and the introduction of agrarian
economies. Brāhmaṇa settlements generally loyal to the king could
curb the hostile ambitions of new competitors for power.
Of the varṇa categories, that of kṣatriya was largely limited to
the royal family and was underlined when a clan assumed kingship.
In terms of exercising administrative authority, the kāyastha caste
was visible, and as a caste almost more so than even the kṣatriya.
Inscriptions as Official Histories 591
The vaiśya varṇa seems to have been subsumed in references
to the śresṭhin. Occupational groups come under the rubric of
śūdras, more often identified as jātis, with their own hierarchies.
The lowest unchanging level is that of the caṇḍāla. Despite the
statements that the king is protecting the varṇaśrama-dharma and
preventing the mixing of castes, it would seem that actually the
system of varṇa was not necessarily being observed as required
by the normative texts.
Inscriptions from the period of decline of Candella power
indicate that factions at the court probably played a large and
effective role in the kingdom. This would be expected in a situ-
ation where such factions would be the potential for new states
and ruling families. It is curious that in the interface between reli-
gious sectarianism and political factionalism, as depicted in the
Prabodhacandrodaya, there is little concern with the potentially
overwhelming faction waiting at the threshold of the kingdom,
that of the Turks and Afghans and their local allies.
Initially the substratum cult was that of Śākta-Śaktī and
Tantrism together with varieties of shamanism. Adapting elements
of the mythology and ritual practices of those at the lower end
of the social stratification became a mechanism of control. The
peasants in service relationships to the brāhmaṇas could be kept
subordinated through caste codes and religious ideology. Taxation
imposed on peasants was oppressive, referred to as karapīḍā, the
pain of tax.73 Turning clansmen into śūdras converted them into
a tied peasantry technically not enslaved but in effect unfree.
Social history from inscriptions is more pointed than in the
normative texts. The difference is perhaps striking in the speci-
fication of witnesses to a grant,74 who are not listed by varṇa but
more generally by occupation, suggesting that the formality of
the varṇa listing was dropped on such occasions. The earlier in-
scriptions mention the king addressing the village assembly and
use the term, samajñapayati, he orders them all. Later, mention
is made of three inclusive categories, the revenue collectors, the
village headman and the rest. In the twelfth century the list is more
73 E.g. references to karapīḍa, Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 6.1.38.
74 K.K. Shah, “Social Structure in Candella Grants”, 28–34.
592 The Past Before Us
detailed and includes kuṭumbins, kāyasthas, and mahattaras. Still
later the list includes those at the lowest social position, the medas
and caṇḍālas. The change takes two hundred years but does point
to an administrative difference in the specific listing of various
professions and castes and the need to do so.
Demarcation between caste society and the forest-dwellers
can be strident. There is a continued use of generic names for
the latter—Śabara, Pulinda, and Bhilla. There is no longer the
partially romantic, partially realistic description of the Śabaras,
as in the Harṣacarita, with a sneaking admiration for the son of
the chief who knows every leaf in the forest. Now, four centuries
later, they are expendable since only the state has rights over the
forest. They resist the encroachment of the state, therefore their
subjugation is necessary. Their suppression assists the process of
cultural incorporation. They have their own hierarchy though, and
the Gonds are superior in the Vindhyan region.
Forts and temples were the main location of royal inscriptions.
Given that a number of trade routes traversed the kingdom it is
possible that forts also served as sanctuaries for travelling mer-
chants fearful of being set upon by brigands. In lean periods, the
state itself may have indulged in some degree of indirect brig-
andage. The use of the term viśiṣa (eminence) in relation to the
administration of forts again underlines their importance. Forts
would have housed the core of the armies maintained by such
dynasties, which, even if not as large as the Turkish chroniclers
or the bards would have us believe, were nevertheless sizeable.
Candella rule witnessed a shift in cult centres and in the forms
of the monuments that marked them, both of which are reflected in
the inscriptions. The earlier inscriptions cluster around Khajuraho
although there are a few from Mahobā. Yet Mahobā was the more
fertile tract, with extensive agricultural activity using a number
of reservoirs and lakes.75 This may have been one reason why the
declining Candella power survived in this area. A sizeable number
of inscriptions are grants of arable land and villages, and describe
the measuring of land and the placing of boundary markers, so
75 K.K. Shah, “Economic Revolution in Early Medieval Bundelkhand”,
167–74.
Inscriptions as Official Histories 593
essential to efficient revenue collection.76 The brāhmaṇa grantees,
instrumental in agricultural expansion, authored texts on technical
expertise such as the Kṛṣiparāśara. The focus is on rice cultivation
and mention is also made of the cultivation of sugarcane, cotton,
hemp, and to the working of mines for metals. The presence of
a substantial Jaina community would point to active commerce.
However, the Candellas do not issue their own coins until the
reign of Kīrtivarman. Prior to this, the gadhaiya coins commonly
used in northern India were in circulation. Candella coins tended
to imitate those of the Kalacuris, suggesting that commerce was
directed to and from that area.
Royal temples were symbolic of the closeness of royalty to divi-
nity and also to economic wealth that sustained such patronage.
A historical trajectory can also be traced through the evolution
of temple-building, from the simple structures meant for hous-
ing an image to the multiplex buildings and courtyards which
expanded historically in keeping with the prosperity of the patron.
Temple-building coincided with the taking of royal titles and the
composition of lengthy inscriptions on the history of the dynasty.
Yet the earliest cult centres would have had links with people of
lesser social status associated with the popular Śākta shrines. The
Caunsaṭh-Yoginī temple at Khajuraho was one among others in
the neighbouring areas. It dates to the ninth century ad and con-
sists of a platform lined with small shrines, with the main shrine
located off-centre at the back.77 Most yoginī temples are circular.
Cell-like shrines along the inner circumference hint perhaps at
the Buddhist vihāra form.78
One of the origin myths of the Candellas, as we have seen
refers to the founder constructing shrines at Khajuraho. The bardic
tradition associates them with the worship of Maniya Devī or
Maniya-deo, located originally at Manyagarh, the original home
76 N.S. Bose, History of the Candellas, 137ff.; S.K. Mitra, The Early Rulers
of Khajuraho, 179ff.
77 Krishna Deva, “The Temples of Khajuraho in Central India”, 4–43; O.C.
Gangoli, et al., The Art of the Candellas; D. Desai, Erotic Sculpture of India, A
Socio-Cultural Study.
78 E. Zannas, Khajuraho, 88ff.
594 The Past Before Us
of the Candellas and important to the Gonds.79 The cultic origins
therefore could have been tribal and Śākta. Śākta cults with
associations to the Śaiva Kaula and Kapālika sects remained a
substratum expression in the area. This is present in the erotic
sculpture at some temples in Khajuraho, as well as references
in the Prabodhacandrodaya. The continuity of the cults would
indicate that they had a popular following, and this provided a
support base for patrons. While still a feudatory, Harṣa helped to
reinstate his overlord at Kanauj, following which he built a temple
to Mātaṅgeśvara. The Śākta-Śaktī concern with power other than
political was in any case a useful link for a reigning king, who also
claimed that he was being favoured by the goddess Śrī.
Given this background the temple to Viṣṇu built by Yaśovarman
is a distinct point of departure. It demarcates the royal family and
the court from those who adhered only to the earlier cult centres. It
is an indication of the appropriation of Vaiṣṇavism and Sanskritic
culture on the part of the elite, and it is a statement of power: the
family now had the resources to build such a temple. The Viṣṇu
temple is one of the markers of independent statehood. The ins-
cription was composed by the kavi Mādhava who was evidently
familiar with Sanskrit literary texts. Specific mention is made of
the image coming from the Himalayan regions, having passed
through the hands of various rulers. Icons were captured or gifted
as expressions of power. The coming of the image of Viṣṇu sym-
bolizes the coming of kingship, and if need be with divinity. For
the prevailing Bhagavatism the icon of Viṣṇu spoke of divinity and
sovereignty. This was an additional source of power that claimed
to go beyond sacrificial rituals and genealogical connection.
Royal temples were built, imitating those in other kingdoms,
and claiming equality. The earlier sthapatis and builders would
have been brought in from existing temple centres, some still based
at sites linked to the post-Gupta temples of the region, and others
being invited from major temple centres of contemporary dynas-
ties. Sthapatis and śilpins, architects and master craftsmen, were
another impressively mobile profession, judging by the spread
79 V.A. Smith, “The History and Coinage of the Chandel (Chandella) Dynasty
of Bundelkhand”, 114–48.
Inscriptions as Official Histories 595
of styles traversing many kingdoms. The evolution of a style
would partly draw on their earlier experience of having worked
in neighbouring kingdoms, on their observation of architectural
history in the region, on the forms desired by individual patrons
and on the rules as described in the texts on temple construction.
Temple architecture evolved historically, and the architects not
only knew this history but used its language. Images which carry
the name of the sculptor, such as the rūpakāra Rāma or Lakkhan
or Devarāja, were the ones made by the then better-known crafts-
men who might have used this as a method of publicizing their
craftsmanship. Sculptors and builders would tend to disperse
when a dynasty declined, at which point they searched for new
patrons. Stylistic elements travelled from place to place, as part of
this dispersal, apart from the dominance of certain stylistic forms.
But the period of magnificence was brief, lasting a century and a
half. From the reign of Madanavarman, there seems to have been
a greater outlay of wealth on constructing forts than temples.
Khajuraho sees the peak of artistic and religious patronage
in the tenth and eleventh centuries with its cluster of temples,
Vaiṣṇava, Śaiva, and Jaina. Subsequently the centre moves to
Kālañjara and includes Ajaygadh. Not much effort is made to
convert these forts into royal capitals with impressive palaces
and temples. As against this, there are many more tanks being
constructed around Mahobā. Clearly, this was a time of political
uncertainties and threats from neighbours and feudatories. In the
later period, more inscriptions were issued from the forts than
from places in the plains, barring copper-plate grants.
Inscriptions narrate a history of the Candella kingdom. There is
evidence on its politics, on the economy that sustained it, on caste
statuses, and on religious sects with an implicit indication of how
they changed. The sequence of the inscriptions is in chronological
order and there is a firm sense of linear time. Evidence for state-
ments pertaining to the past was possible because there were court
records of earlier rulers and events. The history is limited to that
of the Candella dynasty and does not go back to previous times.
This is probably because Jejākabhukti was not an independent
kingdom earlier. There is a consciousness of the need to conserve
documents and where necessary to copy documents that may be
596 The Past Before Us
damaged in order that they may be conserved. Earlier inscriptions
are the sources of historical information and their format becomes
the precedent for later inscriptions. Causality in explanation lies
in the theory that political power is determined by the play and
ambition of surrounding kingdoms and by intermediaries, and that
this contributes to the rise and fall of kingdoms.
The intention of the inscription was to legitimize the dynasty
through various ways: ancestral claims to lineage; marriage al-
liances; the activities of the court; recording the major events
associated with the rulers; registering grants and explaining why
they were made, and to whom, and when. The intention was to
document and record information on which to base claims and
continuities, and to make such information available for the use of
future rulers. As annals, inscriptions expressed history in a form
recognizable in the knowledge systems of the time—which today
may not be so clearly recognizable.
15
Vaṃśāvalīs
Chronicles of Place and
Person—The Rājataraṅgiṇī
1. The Chronicle
The vaṃśāvalī as a genre was the chronicle of a state, region,
or kingdom. It recorded various changes at the tipping
point, as it were, of the small kingdom being converted
into a more powerful larger one. As I have suggested in the
previous chapter, these changes included the mutation of clan
so cieties into caste societies when the kingdom was established,
the extension of the peasant economy to support the kingdom,
and recognition of the mutual acculturation of Puranic and
local religion. The change was manifested most clearly in the
establishing of a court culture and administration in the kingdom,
requiring literacy for maintaining records. Its most visible form
lay in royal temples as symbols of power. The records covered
local events, but their form reflected the processes of change that
were taking place in other regions as well.
The initial form of the vaṃśāvalīs, as fragments of information,
probably began from the latter part of the first millennium ad,
but their more definitive forms took shape a few centuries later.
Found in many parts of the subcontinent, they vary from brief and
somewhat cryptic dynastic lists to lengthy poems treated as kāvyas,
narrating events in sequential order. They draw on a number of
598 The Past Before Us
sources since they had to adjust the descent lists of dynasties and
create a linear history.
Shuffling events into a single chronology can also be prob­
lematic. For the earlier entries, some concession may be made
to what they assume is history. When the sources become more
reliable, as for instance when inscriptions are consulted, this is
less of a problem. The distinction between the vaṃśāvalī and the
other genres of the time that have been discussed in previous
chapters is that its scope is not limited to a single king, as in the
carita, or to a single dynasty, as in its inscriptions. The chronicle
incorporates the history of a region from its beginnings to the pre­
sent. The sources consulted therefore vary. Some could have their
information “edited” from time to time. Early genealogies would
have been subjected to telescoping or padding—eliminating some
names, adding others—without too much attention to historicity.
Nevertheless, the vaṃśāvalī was written from the perspective of
a point in time, and this would have left a mark on the narrative.
Such chronicles focused on the region and referred to the history
of neighbouring areas only where it impinged on the history being
recorded: other areas would have had their own chronicles.
Vaṃśāvalīs draw on both the itihāsa­purāṇa and the local tra­
dition, focusing on the court or the temple or even, on occasion,
the caste. In some places they are referred to by different names,
such as pīdhiyāvalī (the line of generations); prabandha and rāso
in Gujarat and Rajasthan; buruñjis among the Ahoms of Assam;
Mādalā Pañjī in Orissa. The keeping of court records is advocated
by Kauṭilya and others from earlier centuries, and although these
have not survived, except for inscriptions, some fragmentary
records may have been available to those writing chronicles.
Since the time of William Jones, it has been repeatedly said that
there was only one text from early India that could be regarded as
historical writing: the Rājataraṅgiṇī, a history of Kashmir written
by Kalhaṇa in 1148–9.1 Yet even this statement was doubted by
1 Kalhaṇa’s Rājataraṅgiṇī, Chronicle of the Kings of Kashmir, Sanskrit Text
with Critical Notes, ed. M.A. Stein; Rājataraṅgiṇī, ed. and trans. M.A. Stein;
U.N. Ghoshal, “Dynastic Chronicles of Kashmir”; H.C.Ray, Dynastic History of
Northern India, vol. 1, 107–84.
Vaṃśāvalīs: Chronicles of Place and Person 599
some. Aurel Stein, who worked extensively on the text, argued that
it was intended for didactic religion and not history, a statemnent
that shows little familiarity with the religion of India, or with
the genre of chronicles as historical writing. The choice of what
is included in a chronicle draws on a historiographic tradition,
however muted it may seem. Kalhaṇa describes it as a kāvya,2
but this should not be read as a disclaimer of its being history.
The literary form is that of a kāvya, as was so with many literary
compositions, especially in Sanskrit, but its contents are intended
as history. The persons and events he describes are those that he
believed existed and occurred in the past. This is different from
other contemporary kāvyas that are clealy fictional. It is also dif­
ferent from the caritas and the praśasti inscriptions, but is closer
to the vaṃśāvalī with its larger canvas and its more expansive
historical perspective.
The uniqueness of this text has been attributed to what some see
as a kind of demarcation of Kashmir, suggesting a sense of nation­
alism at that time;3 there was also contact with other people who
had a stronger sense of history, such as in the Chinese and Islamic
traditions. However, there is little evidence of the Sanskrit literati’s
familiarity with Chinese historical texts, or with texts in Arabic,
Persian, and Turkish. The persistence of Buddhism in the region,
with its recognizable sense of history, as well as the proximity of
Ladakh and Tibet with an incipient tradition of chronicles, could
well have made an impact on scholarship in Kashmir. To this
one may add that although the Rājataraṅgiṇī is of a remarkable
quality in historical writing, the genre as such was not unique to
Kashmir and was known to other courts. What may have made
a difference is that Kashmir from the ninth to the twelfth century
was a significant centre of scholarship in grammar, aesthetics,
and philo sophy—in the work of Ananadavardhana, Abhinava­
gupta, and others—and this ambience would have affected the
work of a sensitive scholar such as Kalhaṇa.
This intellectual vibrancy is attested to by Al­Biruni, the Central
Asian scholar who spent time in India in the eleventh century. He
2 1.4–5, 1.23.
3 A.L. Basham, “The Kashmir Chronicle”, 57–65.
600 The Past Before Us
makes particular reference to what he calls the Hindu sciences
flourishing in Kashmir and Banaras, and thinks that the inroads of
Mahmud of Ghazni led scholars to flee to these two places.4 But
the high point of the intellectual articulation of Kashmiri scholars
was before the arrival of Mahmud.
Kalhaṇa’s deep interest in the past of Kashmir seems to have
arisen from his observation of recent politics, combined with what
a scholar of that time would have read. There was doubtless an
imprint of the itihāsa­purāṇa tradition through the reading of vari­
ous Purāṇas. For someone curious about the past of Kashmir, there
also had to be a familiarity with Buddhist historiography, refl ect -
ed in the history of the Saṅgha and the narratives of kings who
were patrons of Buddhism, such as the Aśokāvadāna. This would
be expected in an area where once Buddhism had been an impor­
tant ideological component of the culture.
I shall not discuss the Rājataraṅgiṇī in detail since so much has
already been written on it as a history. I would like to draw attention
to the chronicles or vaṃśāvalīs, of which genre the Rājataraṅgiṇī
is one, and without doubt the most impressive. A comparison with
less­known ones, such as the vaṃśāvalī of Chamba, might provide
some insights into the relation of vaṃśāvalīs with the itihāsa­
purāṇa tradition. As a genre, it is found in various parts of the
subcontinent, although those of the hill states tended to be dis­
cussed in earlier writings on the subject.5
Vaṃśāvalī is a path of succession, and the succession is of kings.
It is not the path of a single line of kings, which is not possible be­
cause the narrative generally starts in the remote past. The history
of various dynasties is being narrated, and these have to be aligned
to provide continuity. The integrating of more than a couple of
chronicles in some cases also creates problems. Other information
fills out the details of the path.
The corpus of inscriptions of a dynasty recorded past events
and persons, but the chronicles fleshed these out with informa­
tion on other facets. The pattern of the inscriptions and that of
4 Alberuni’s India, vol. I, 22, 45.
5 E.T. Atkinson, Himalayan Gazetteer (1881–4); J. Ph. Vogel, Antiquities of
the Chamba State; S.P. Sen, Sources for the History of India.
Vaṃśāvalīs: Chronicles of Place and Person 601
the chronicles suggests a continuity and development in historical
thinking. The vaṃśāvalī was different in form and content from
what preceded it and which remained parallel—namely, historical
biographies and inscriptions. Nevertheless, there are similarities
with these that are incorporated into the chronicles. The unit was,
relatively speaking, the small state and not large imperial sys­
tems. Where there was limited data on early dynasties and if the
turnover of dynasties as in later times was fairly frequent, then
the author of the chronicle had to find ways to make the narrative
read preferably as seamless.
2. The Author
The Rājataraṅgiṇī forms a useful starting point for looking at the
format of the vaṃśāvalī. Stein edited the text, which appears to
have been put together by Ramakantha in 1648–86. Although it
was distributed later among various members of the family of
Pandit Sivarama, who interestingly treated it as a patrimony, it
nevertheless survived.6 Manuscript copies were available in the
nineteenth century in Calcutta and Lucknow.7 The manuscripts as
we have them now and the variations have been discussed else­
where.8
Kalhaṇa is described in the colophon as the son of Caṇpaka, a
minister at the court of the previous king. The king was deposed
and killed in 1101. Caṇpaka was at the court for many years but
may not have had an official position. The successor dynasty may
not have continued the services of families who had served the
previous king. What the court had experienced in the actions of
recent kings was not attractive to a discerning scholar. Kalhaṇa
thus was familiar with court circles, even if not serving at the
court himself. This distancing probably enabled him to make in­
dependent judgements on various rulers. In this, one is reminded
of Bāṇa’s perspective on the court: it may explain the intellectual
6 The genealogical records of present­day dominant castes, maintained by
pāṇḍas at pilgrimage centres, are similarly viewed as property, hence the hesita­
tion to show them to those who are not clients.
7 Kalhaṇa’s Rājataraṅgiṇī, ch. 3, 42–55.
8 M. Witzel, “On Indian Historical Writing”, 1–57.
602 The Past Before Us
quality of both texts. It has been suggested that the Rājataraṅgiṇī
was in part a response to the events linked to the change of dynasty
and the removal of Kalhaṇa’s father from office, but the nature of
the narrative suggests a wider interest in the history of the region.
He is critical of earlier rulers but more circumspect about the cur­
rent dynasty, whose reigns are addressed in the last book, which
is half the length of the whole text.9
Unlike the historical biographies, in this text there is no brief
biography of the author. Kalhaṇa’s birthplace was the ancient
Buddhi st centre at Parihāsapura. He began to write his chronicle in
the Laukika era 4224, i.e. ad 1148/9, and completed it the follow­
ing year. His intention was to write a kāvya, a long poem in śānta
rasa, a mood evoking peace, but what resulted was somewhat
different owing to the turbulence at the court.
3. The Rājataraṅgiṇī
The chronicle begins with invocatory verses to Śiva. Even though
he was a Śaiva brāhmaṇa, Kalhaṇa does not omit narrating the
earlier Śaiva persecution of Buddhist monks and the destruction of
Buddhist monasteries. Possibly he and his family were eclectic, as
would seem from his uncle having saved the Buddha image from
Parihāsapura when the eleventh-century king Harṣa was plunder­
ing temples and religious centres.10 The name Kalhaṇa has been
explained as an Apabhraṃśa form of the Sanskrit kalyāṇa; if this
is so, it is curious that he did not sanskritize his name.
Kalhaṇa was not writing to pamper any particular patron. His
work appears to be an exercise in intellectual curiosity about the
past of Kashmir, the kingdom where he lived and the court at
which his father had served. He is also concerned with understand­
ing the inexplicable behaviour of kings just prior to the current
dynasty. Hence his criticism of the actions of kings who were
his close contemporaries. His narrative is peppered with severe
judgements on various groups who exploited Kashmir. There is
symmetry between the historian and the court, for if the dynasty
9 Ibid., Book 8.
10 Rājataraṅgiṇī, 7.1097–8.
Vaṃśāvalīs: Chronicles of Place and Person 603
is being legitimized by the historian, the king has to recognize the
delicate relationship between ruler and historian—lest the latter
use it to the disadvantage of the former. With the decline of Vedic
rituals of legitimation, grants to brāhmaṇas were on occasion an
acknowledgement of their facility in providing status in various
ways, as occasionally by constructing genealogies. This reduc ­
ed the dependence on actual kinship and instead relied more on
using the historical tradition to establish legitimacy. The author
with links to the court could emerge as an authoritative figure.
There has been some discussion on whether the Rājataraṅgiṇī
should be viewed as a kāvya or as history; or, is such a distinc­
tion tenable only for modern historical writing?11 Early societies
tended not to make a sharp differentiation between the two and
there can be overlaps in descriptions of events and persons. Even
if it is called a kāvya, it is not romantic fiction. Kalhaṇa is aware of
representing the past “as it was”, as itihāsa. This was characteristic
of the vaṃśāvalī, and it could take the form of a kāvya. Kalhaṇa
granted the right of the poet to represent the past which the poet
evokes and sees as divya dṛṣṭi (divine insight).12 But the poet must
also be impartial in narrating what happened.13 A Buddhist strand
lay in his underlining the impermanence of event and person be­
cause he believed this encourages the mind to be at peace—śānta
rasa. His narrative incorporates rulers such as Aśoka and Kaniṣka,
and even the evil Mihirakula. These persons figure in Mahāyāna
Buddhist texts but not in the Purāṇas, barring Aśoka who is just
a name in a list of kings.
The text is itihāsa in kāvya form, narrating the history of Kashmir
and incorporating into the narration legends, chronology based on
written records, and details of events closer to the author’s time.
It has many poetic passages but there is little of rasa, dhvani, and
varying metres. It is written in Sanskrit, and his handling of the
language makes it evident that he was a man of considerable learn­
ing. Kalhaṇa maintains that a poet in a sense resurrects the past,
and a good kāvya must on that account be an impartial narration
11 See, for example, the discussion in W. Slaje, “In the Guise of Poetry—
Kalhaṇa Reconsidered”, 207–44.
12 Rājataraṅgiṇī, 1.4–5.
13 Ibid., 1.7.
604 The Past Before Us
of events, free from love and hatred. It must incorporate informa­
tion from as many sources as possible. It must bring together the
fragments and give a connected account. Echoing Bilhaṇa, he
writes that the poet can bestow immortality on kings who would
otherwise not be remembered.14 He uses the term bhūtārtha, which
is not just “the past” but “the meaning of the past”, and “that which
has really happened”, and this makes a significant difference to
the narration of the past.
Kalhaṇa claims that his narrative has been arranged in accor­
dance with the time and succession of kings, and can be read or
heard.15 He further claims that he is correcting the chronology of
his predecessors and giving a connected account of the past by
partly filling in gaps and removing fictitious genealogies.16 This
of course is an area where the reliability of the source becomes
crucial, and Kalhaṇa, even though generally careful, may not have
been so on every occasion.
His attitude to history was also conditioned by his belief in
karma, the consequence of individual actions. But to this he
added that the karma of the king was intertwined with that of his
people, a ready explanation for good or bad kings. The narrative is
straightforward and takes an independent position—all the more
striking in an age when eulogies were a common idiom. Belief
in the supernatural is, however, conceded when he attributes
events to the power of Fate, divine retribution, magic, the decline
of dharma in the Kaliyuga, and karma. However, this does not
prevent him from explaining the intricacies of factions at the court
or the importance of fiscal and political policies.
4. The Sources
Unlike many other chronicles, Kalhaṇa takes care to mention the
sources that he has consulted, apart from his reading as a scholar.
The work shows a familiarity not only with the epics and Purāṇas,
which would be expected, but with more historically­oriented
writing, such as the historical biographies written by Bāṇa and
14 Ibid., 1.3–4, 45–6.
15 Ibid., 1.21–4.
16 Ibid., 1.8–18.
Vaṃśāvalīs: Chronicles of Place and Person 605
more recently by Bilhaṇa. The influence of the Harṣacarita is
noticeable.17 The discussion on his sources is not only of interest
to the writing of the chronicle, it also indicates the lively interest
in the past of various scholars and keepers of records. This ap­
pears to have been, not unexpectedly, normal to the activities of
royal courts. Kalhaṇa’s description of the sources provides further
evidence for the existence of such texts.
As sources for the Rājataraṅgiṇī he consulted eleven works
on the rājakathā (narrative of rulers).18 He read the prabandha or
chronicle of Suvrata, a collation and summary of fragmentary
chronicles, and thought it lacked learning. Writing the biography
of a contemporary king, he feels, requires less skill than writing
a chronicle. Other sources include the important local Purāṇa
called the Nīlamata Purāṇa, with its minimal historical data, and
Kṣemendra’s Nṛpāvalī, or list of kings, which he dismisses as in­
correct. Various local inscriptions, especially the śāsanas (orders)
for establishing temples and monasteries, which were generally
grants of land and often included praśastipaṭṭas (the history of the
dynasty in summary form), and coin legends were consulted, as
were segments of the oral tradition preserved in popular legends
and other historical narratives. Among them, the Chavillākara had
information about Aśoka and his successors;19 the Pārthivāvalī of
Helarāja mentioned other kings, as did the text of Padmamihira.
The Nīlamata Purāṇa was an important source being the spe­
cific Purāṇa for Kashmir.20 It had been named after Nīla, whose
identity is a little ambiguous, either as an early king or a Nāga. It
was probably composed around the late first millennium ad and
was well known by the twelfth century (although dated to as
early as the sixth or seventh centuries ad).21 Since it does not con ­
form to all the themes required of an ideal Purāṇa it is perhaps
better categorized as an upapurāṇa or sub-Purāṇa.22 It has some
17 Kalhaṇa’s Rājataraṅgiṇī, vol. I, Introduction, 11.
18 Rājataraṅgiṇī, 1.9–15.
19 Ibid., 1.17–19.
20 Ved Kumari, The Nīlamata Purāṇa.
21 G. Buhler, “Report on a Tour in Search of Sanskrit Manuscripts in Kash­
mir”, 38ff.
22 Krishna Mohan, Early Medieval History of Kashmir.
606 The Past Before Us
information on ideas of time and of the descent of various lineages
similar to those of the major Purāṇas, reflecting a familiarity with
the manvantaras (reckoning in enormous time spans), the yugas, as
also the vaṃśānucarita section with genealogies of earlier rulers.
Kalhaṇa quotes from these but some names in the genealogies
were by now missing in their more recent recensions, suggesting
that there had been a “telescoping” of this section by eliminating
a few names. All the names are unlikely to have been authentic,
so the deletion of some would have resulted from a variety of
reasons, not least simple forgetfulness in memorizing a list. In
starting with the Nīlamata Purāṇa Kalhaṇa is locating Puranic
history well into the past, and prior to the kind of history that fol­
lows. History for him is not an extension of the Purāṇa, although
this has been suggested.23
Other categories of texts used as sources were the sthala­purāṇas
and the māhātmyas. These purported to narrate the believed his­
tories of specific sacred places and their topographies and were
enveloped in the mythology of the location, its deities and its as­
sociations. Of these the Vitasta­māhātmya was the most relevant
for Kalhaṇa. This relates to the Jhelum river, the mainstream in
every sense of the Kashmir valley. The māhātmyas attempt to put
together the legends of temples and places of pilgrimage and the
rituals to be performed at each place. They often subsume what
is believed to be local history. A fair amount of geographical
information is included through the descriptions of the places.
Such texts were written on birchbark, which requires that they be
copied more than once, and the rewriting could have introduced
changes.
The Nīlamata Purāṇa is thought to have borrowed from the Brah-
māṇḍa and Viṣṇudharmottara Purāṇas whereas borrowing from
the Mahābhārata is more subtle. It has been argued that it has three
frame stories in imitation of the two of the Mahābhārata,24 each
frame representing a cultural tradition. It starts with a question
that Vaiśampāyana is said to have asked Janamejaya at the yajña
23 R. Inden, “Imperial Purāṇas: Kashmir as Vaiṣṇava Center of the Words”,
29–99.
24 Masato Fuji, “On the Textual Formation of the Nīlamata Purāṇa”,
55–82.
Vaṃśāvalīs: Chronicles of Place and Person 607
with which the epic opens, and the question was why the kings of
Kashmir did not participate in the war at Kurukṣetra. This is the
first frame linking the text to the epic and could well have been
added on at some point. It reflects the wish to associate the history
of Kashmir with events of the Mahābhārata.
The second frame, which is more regional, is the imagined con­
versation between the first mythical king of Kashmir, Gonanda I,
and the ṛṣi Bṛhadāśva. This introduces aspects of the early history
of Kashmir which have parallels with the epic. The third is the
local frame of the conversation between the imagined king Nīla,
the lord of the Nāgas, explaining the rituals and customs of the
first inhabitants to the brāhmaṇa Candradeva. The first frame is
a claim to wide cultural links and depth in time, the second incor­
porates most of the text, and the third focuses on events linked
to the Nāgas who are said to be the indigenous inhabitants—in
a sense constituting the prehistory. This perhaps suggests that
the current religions were brought in by later settlers such as the
brāhmaṇas.
The mythological history of Kashmir is related through the
legend that the area was once a great lake and devastated by the
presence of a demon. Eventually the demon, through a ruse, was
made to drink dry the waters of the lake and the valley emerged.
This story is also told in the account of Xuanzang. It is a stereo­
typical story which occurs in the origin myths of many Himalayan
kingdoms.25 The mention of various places leads to the narration
of their māhātmyas. A list of people who inhabited Kashmir at
various times is given, and this includes the Nāgas who were pre­
dominant and the Piśācas associated with the north-west of India.
Many of the names are known from other sources, such as the
Abhisāras, Gāndhāras, Śakas, Khasas, and Madras—interestingly,
all people of the North. The term nāga is also used for tutelary
deities residing in the springs and pools of the valley, each of
which had a small shrine or temple, described in some detail in
the text.26
25 N. Allen, “And the Lake Drained Away”, 435–51; H.H. Wilson, The Hindu
History of Kashmir, 8–9, mentions later historians of Sultanate times referring
to the breaching of the Baramullah Pass to allow the lake to be drained.
26 Rājataraṅgiṇī, 1.29ff.
608 The Past Before Us
A number of well­known stories relating to religious events, as
given in the major Purāṇas, are repeated here. Buddha is included
as an avatāra of Viṣṇu. Although also known from other areas,
in Kashmir this might suggest that there was still a presence of
Buddhism. Some texts speak of the Śaivaśāstras having been
written to stem the spread of Buddhism and expose the Buddha
as fraudulent.27 In the tenth century a vihāra was burnt and what
remained of it was used for building a temple to Śiva.28 The
ostensible reason for burning the vihāra was to trap a rebellious
feudatory, but the revocation by the king of the grant of thirty­six
villages to the vihāra and their being granted to others, suggests
that the motive was the suppression of Buddhism. Kashmir was
one of the important centres of Northern Buddhism, from where
Buddhist monks and scholars went to Central Asia and China in
the early centuries ad. The competition with the Śaivas was fierce
since, among other things, they saw the Buddhists as rivals for
royal patronage.
Reference is made to many groups of brāhmaṇas. Those con­
cerned with historical traditions are two: the kathāvid who recites
or reads the Purāṇas at various ceremonies, and the itihāsavid who
is knowledgeable about the past. The latter category is an addi­
tional qualification to the usual ones associated with brāhmaṇas,
although the Bhṛgu-Aṅgirasas were already associated with
itihāsa. Referring specifically to an itihāsa­knowing brāhmaṇa
makes itihāsa more central to the construction of knowledge
about the past.
3. The Development of the Rājataraṅgiṇī
The Rājataraṅgiṇī consists of eight books of unequal length and
divides seemingly into three sections, suggestive of the pattern of
the vaṃśānucarita (the section on succession) in the Viṣṇu Purāṇa.
This may be a natural division based on themes.29 The first part
27 Ved Kumari, The Nīlamata Purāṇa, 177.
28 T. Funayama, “Remarks on Religious Predominance in Kashmir: Hindu
or Buddhist”, 367–76; Rājataraṅginī, 6.171–3.
29 A.L. Basham, “Kalhana and his Chronicle”, 57–65.
Vaṃśāvalīs: Chronicles of Place and Person 609
covers origin myths and early inhabitants. The second moves
towards kings of vaguely defined early dynasties. The third and
most substantial section is the narrative of established dynas­
ties.
The origin myths of Book One continue into Book Two with
its references to scattered kings and dynasties. The draining of
the lake prior to the settlement of the area coincided in time with
the first six Manus and was ready for settlement during the time
of the seventh Manu.30 This links the local narrative with the
meta­narrative in the Viṣṇu Purāṇa. The earlier text was taken as
a source for the beginnings of history, and in the itihāsa­purāṇa
tradition, history began with the narrative as given in the Purāṇas.
(Significantly there are no references to Aryans as the founders
of history!) The draining of the lake was necessary to forming
a nucleus for the region. The implicit symbolism is that of the
receding of water to provide land for settlement, as in the story
of Manu and the Flood from the Purāṇas. It helps establish terri­
torial boundaries which were more firmly defined by subsequent
events.
The names of fifty-two rulers approximately contemporary
with the early lineages listed in the Purāṇas are said to be lost.31
The chronology is then synchronized with the calculation of the
Kaliyuga, as given in the Bṛhatsaṃhitā, a post­Gupta text on
astronomy.32
The earliest people were the Nāgas associated with the Vidyā-
dharas, an association that is more frequent in the Sramanic
texts. The kings of the first book often borrow names from the
Nīlamata Purāṇa, which links them with the major Purāṇas. The
earliest king, Gonanda I, is said to be related to Jarāsandha of the
Mahābhārata, and therefore involved in the battles with Kṛṣṇa.
The choice of relationship was with someone who was opposed
to the Yādavas, and therefore to Kṛṣṇa, and was virtually mur­
dered in the epic. His son Gonanda II was a mere child when the
Mahābhārata war took place and therefore could not participate
30 Rājataraṅgiṇī, 1.25–8.
31 Ibid., 1.44ff.
32 Ibid., 1.56.
610 The Past Before Us
in it. This answers the question why the kings of Kashmir were
not present on the battlefield at Kurukṣetra. Participation in
the war was a matter of status but also suggested links with the
kṣatriya rājās of the genealogies of the Purāṇas. The fifty-two
lost generations appropriately belong to this period, a grey area
in historical events.
A further list of kings includes Lava, the first to grant an agra-
hāra, and Kuśa, the latter succeeding the former, but these two are
not connected with the Rāmāyaṇa. Rather, the early times involve
many siddhas (holy men), and Śaiva ascetics, common to other
chronicles as well. The former would have been attuned to the
local religion, the latter probably less so although their opposition
was to the Buddhists. The opposition is sometimes disguised in
stories of misbehaviour against royalty.33 An example of this was
a Buddhist monk seducing, through magical power, the wife of
king Nara. The predictable punishment is the burning down of
many vihāras, with their grants being revoked and given instead
to brāhmaṇas. These Śaiva–Buddhist confrontations are referred
to often, and, with royalty generally supporting the former, some
decline in Buddhism was inevitable and the decline has to be ex ­
plained. This contrasts with earlier times, when both were reci­
pients of royal patronage.
Aśoka receives more attention than he gets in other brahmani­
cal works, where he is merely a name in a king­list. Here he is
the first historically known king in the narrative. Kalhaṇa cites
a specific source, the Chavillākara, now unavailable, as provid­
ing information on the king. Such information was also available
from the Buddhist texts of the Northern Tradition, such as the
Aśokāvadāna. Kalhaṇa states that Aśoka embraced the doctrine
of the Jina, i.e. became a Buddhist, founded the city of Śrīnagara,
and built many stūpas. He is said to have brought Buddhism to
Kashmir.34 He is treated as a king of Kashmir with no mention of
the rest of his empire, except that he is called a bhūpati (lord of
the earth). He obtained a son, Jalauka (not mentioned in any other
source) through propitiating Śiva, and this son was instrumental in
33 Ibid., 1.199–200.
34 Ibid., 1.101ff.
Vaṃśāvalīs: Chronicles of Place and Person 611
attacking the mlecchas—presumably the Hellenistic Greeks that
threatened the kingdom. Unlike his father, Jalauka was not a patron
of the Buddhists. He settled new lands, introduced the practice
of caste in social functioning, and created a kingdom with a state
administration comparable to that of Yudhiṣṭhira (who by now
was being held up as the paragon of a dharmic king). The process
described by Kalhaṇa seems fairly accurate. Subsequent to this,
the Kuṣāṇa kings are listed but described as turuṣkas (Turks), the
label doubtless pointing only to their Central Asian origin. Some
of the names in the list are known from other sources but their
order here is confused. This is the period when Buddhism was pre ­
valent but conflict with the brāhmaṇas is apparent.
The competition between Buddhists and brāhmaṇas soon des­
cends into the persecution of the Buddhists, with their monasteries
being burnt, their grants revoked, and on occasion their monks
killed. The Hūṇa/Hun king Mihirakula was especially vicious
and is described as bhūpāla vetāla (demon king).35 Kalhaṇa is
contemptuous of the brāhmaṇas of Gandhāra who accepted grants
from such a despicable king. He is surprised that the subjects did
not rise in revolt and kill him and asserts that he was probably
protected by the gods.36 The Hūṇas are followed by a series of
kings that came from elsewhere. Among them was a Meghavāhana
brought from Gandhāra, at the request of the prajā (subjects), and
the saciva (ministers), which was an unusual procedure.
Book Three opens with the narrative of Meghavāhana’s rule and
ends with that of Balāditya. Meghavāhana is a non-brahmanical
figure given to Buddhist and Jaina ethics, such as forbidding ani­
mal sacrifice. He is said to have conquered Laṅkā, the sea having
parted, allowing the army to cross over.37 He and his queen are
donors of many vihāras for monks, but also many agrahāras. The
listing of some of the vihāras is reminiscent of Buddhist chronicles
listing monasteries. Further on in the narrative the removal of a
king is signalled by his abdication in order to become an ascetic,
a theme that crops up from time to time in various narratives.38
35 Ibid., 1.292ff.
36 Ibid., 1.289, 307–16, 324.
37 Ibid., 3.71, 7.1137–8.
38 Ibid., 2.143–4, 151–3, 162.
612 The Past Before Us
The wish to become an ascetic may have been a euphemism for
being forced to abdicate.
Book Four introduces dynastic history in a more systematic
way, constituting a distinctive second section of the text. It begins
with the Kārkoṭa dynasty, which was responsible for consolidating
the kingdom of Kashmir in the seventh century. The origin of the
Kārkoṭas is linked to the Nāga Kārkoṭa, said to be a deity but also
a kinsman of the ruling family. Since this was a dynasty of the
seventh century ad, Chinese annals also provide incidental refer­
ences to corroborate the text, the T’ang rulers being interested in
northern India. They mention that the Kārkoṭa king Candrāpīḍa
requested assistance against the Arabs in ad 713, a time when the
Arabs were attempting a conquest of Sindh. The chronology seems
to tally. Northern India at this time experienced at its frontiers the
proximity of the Chinese, the rise of Tibetan power, the presence
of the Arabs, and the threat of Turkish rule in Afghanistan. This
is not reflected even in a history as perceptive as that of Kalhaṇa,
which may be a comment on the visibility of the threat.
Lalitāditya Muktāpīḍa, the most accomplished king of this
dynasty, carried out expeditions, moving round the earth like the
sun.39 Claims to conquest echo the praśasti inscription of Samu­
dra Gupta, which may have become a model for the writing of
praśastis. Victories in distant places, such as against the almost
mythical Uttarakurus or against Prāgjyotiṣa in Assam may be an
exaggeration, but his campaigns against the Dards in the north­
west of Kashmir and the Bhoṭas or Tibetans to the east are more
plausible. The spectacular campaign against the Central Asian
Turkish tribes, the Tukhāra, is also alluded to by Al-Biruni.40
Kashmir had close relations with them and they are remember­
ed as having been patrons of Buddhism.41 The story is told of a
Tukhāra who used a magic charm to part the waters of the river so
that the army could cross over. When asked for the charm he was
willing to exchange it for an icon of the Buddha from Magadha.42
Lalitāditya was not a major patron of Buddhism as is evident from
39 Ibid., 4.126ff.
40 Alberuni’s India, vol. I, 302.
41 This would of course have been prior to their conversion to Islam.
42 Rājataraṅgiṇī, 4.259.
Vaṃśāvalīs: Chronicles of Place and Person 613
his having built the magnificent Mārtaṇḍa temple to the sun-god
Sūrya. Brāhmaṇas had been invited to settle in Kashmir and they
had come in large numbers, some from Gandhāra and some from
āryadeśa—Central India, Kanauj, and Gauḍa.43
Another narrative states that an icon of Viṣṇu in a temple was
suspended by two magnets, one above it and one below it, a notion
known to more than one author, and may reflect the popularity of
magnetic material at this time.44 This presumes that the icon was
made of metal, possibly iron, although bronze was frequently used
in Kashmir for icons.45 On another occasion, when a piece of waste
land was dug at his orders, two ancient temples were found with
images, and engraved on the pedestals were the words “Rāma”
and “Lakṣmaṇa”. The story suggests wishful thinking. Similarly,
water wells up when Lalitāditya pierces the surface of the desert
with his lance. These are symbolic of the good king deriving from
recognized stereotypes.
Lalitāditya’s grandson Jayāpīḍa set out to conquer Kanauj, and
Kalhaṇa speaks of him as moving in the maṇḍala of kings just as
the sun moves in a maṇḍala of clouds.
The third section of the Rājataraṅgiṇī, consisting of Books Five
to Eight, covers the history of Kashmir over the 300 years prior
to Kalhaṇa. This part is more focused, the narrative becoming
more historical, perhaps in part due to epigraphic records. The
turbulence of politics probably demanded a more precise ac ­
count of events. Avantivarman, ruling in the mid­ninth century
(ad 855–83) built the town of Avantipura. He is best remembered
for permitting the engineer Suyya to redirect the course of the
Jhelum by an upstream dam with strategically located dykes. This
resulted in controlling the river for irrigation and an amazing
increase in agricultural production, with a dramatic reduction in
the price of rice.46
43 Ibid., 1.313, 341–3.
44 For modern readers this statement is similar to that of al­Qazwini, who
maintains that the liṅgam at Somanātha, made of iron, was suspended by a mag­
net, to the amazement of Mahmud of Ghazni and his entourage, who were anxi­
ous to destroy it. R. Thapar, Somanatha: The Many Voices of a History, 55.
45 Rājataraṅgiṇī, 4.185.
46 Ibid., 5.68–117.
614 The Past Before Us
Śaṅkaravarman, who succeeded Avantivarman, campaigned in
the plains of the Punjab and more repeatedly against the Hindu
Shāhiya dynasty which had established itself in Kabul after the
decline of the Turkish Shāhiyas. Kashmir in the ninth century
was involved in the politics not only of the Punjab but also of
Gandhāra and Central Asia. Despite the agricultural prosperity of
the earlier time, there now seems to have been a fiscal crisis which
is reflected in various ways. The peasants came under an oppres­
sive administration which Kalhaṇa attributes to the appointment
of unscrupulous kāyastha officers. This was intensified by forced
labour in the form of kara-begara (porterage corvée), carrying
loads where there was an absence of roads, and the demand of high
taxes.47 Not content with this, the king began plundering temples,
a form of acquiring wealth which was resorted to by other Hindu
rulers of Kashmir as well.
Kalhaṇa mentions the rise of the Tantrins and their rivals the
Ekāṅgas. Both were military groups serving as royal bodyguards
but with a base in land holdings. Each supported opposing factions
at the court especially when a succession was being contested, and
made demands on the one who succeeded. In the tenth century
the intrigue involving these two groups increased, which finally
led the king to call for help from the land­owning intermediaries,
the Ḍāmaras, to re-establish the authority of the ruler. They were
disliked by the kāyasthas and the brāhmaṇas at the court who
saw them as rivals, and were finally brought under control in the
eleventh century.
Kalhaṇa argues that the amassing of wealth by these groups
and their associates and by the king was a disaster,48 as it followed
from famines dislocating people. Storing food in excess of a year’s
consumption, or more than that produced by the tillage of the
fields, was to be prohibited. Surplus food encouraged accumula­
tion which led to wealth and in turn to rebellion.49
Much historical detail follows, till we reach the queen Diddā,
wife of Kṣemagupta, who emerged as the eminence grise during
47 D.D. Kosambi, “Origins of Feudalism in Kashmir”, 31–2, 108–20; Rājata-
raṅgiṇī, 5.51–2.
48 Rājataraṅgiṇī, 5.270–5.
49 Ibid., 4.347–8.
Vaṃśāvalīs: Chronicles of Place and Person 615
the reigns of a few short­lived kings and eventually in ad 980
assumed the rulership herself for a period of twenty­three years.
This was an extraordinary event, unforeseen in the śāstras, but
quite logical in terms of the contemporary politics of Kashmir as
described by Kalhaṇa. It brought her family, from Lohara, into
the contest for kingship. Among other things she restored old
and ruined temples, whereas her husband Kṣemagupta had burnt
down a Buddhist monastery, and had used the remains and those
from decaying temples to build a new temple to Śiva.50 On her
death in 1003 the throne passed to the family of Lohara with the
accession of Diddā’s nephew, Saṁgrāmarāja, who was her brother’s
son. This was in effect a change in the patriline. He was called
upon to assist the Hindu Shāhiya king against Mahmud of Ghazni,
referred to by Kalhaṇa as Hammīra, the king of the Turuṣkas.
With the defeat of the Hindu Shāhiyas, princes from their family
took refuge in Kashmir.
Kalhaṇa repeatedly blames the kāyasthas for maladministration,
and regards them with contempt for being oppressive, and for
looting temples and the treasury. Harṣa, who seized the throne and
ruled from 1089 to 1101, is also called a Turuṣka because he looted
temples in an attempt to overcome a fiscal crisis. Catastrophic
conditions caused by floods and famine resulted in a devastating
rise in prices. The king instituted a special category of officers,
the devotpatananāyaka, the officer for the uprooting of the dei­
ties, and they plundered the temples,51 keeping the wealth for the
king and themselves, despite the extreme distress of the people,
Kalhaṇa attributes Harṣa’s weakness to his lack of policies, his
poor ability to implement orders, his exploitation of his people
and his lack of morality.
Book Eight records the Lohara dynasty of the twelfth century.
The personalities of the time were close contemporaries so there
are virtually blow­by­blow accounts of court politics where some
descriptions read like pen­portraits of people. The intrigues, fac­
tion fighting, and violence continue, and some of this is attributed
to the scheming brāhmaṇas and kāyasthas at the court. There
50 Ibid., 6.171ff., 307, 8.2380.
51 Ibid., 8.1095.
616 The Past Before Us
is additionally a pendulum swing between collaterals. Kalhaṇa
praises the king Uccala, whose benefactions took care of some
of the distress of the subjects.52
In Kalhaṇa’s world deities do not come to the aid of kings, rituals
do not bestow divinity but only status, and caste observances are
not observed by royalty—queens were sometimes from the lowest
castes, the passion of the king overcoming social codes. Rules of
marriage are not observed, with kings marrying indiscriminately.
Was this necessitated by the manoeuvring of the intermediaries
or by a weakness in patriarchy?
The role of ministers, as given in theoretical texts referring
to polity of the post­Gupta period, seems divorced from the
real ity presented by Kalhaṇa, where they are part of the faction-
fighting and dissensions in the administration of the kingdom. His
father having been a minister either to Harṣa or to the later kings,
Kalhaṇa would have had fuller information on their activities.
This is reflected in the details of their reigns. Although the planets
were malignant at his birth, argues Kalhaṇa, Harṣa’s dependence
on ministers and his aversion to confrontations accounted for
many of his problems.53 Resort to the supernatural, and to fate
occasionally mentioned in earlier sections of the text, now tend to
fade. There is greater discussion of the politics of those involved
in governance.
5. The Chronicle as History
The vaṃśāvalī, although it is a succession of kings, is also con­
ducive to constructing the history of a region, which is a charac­
teristic attempt of the genre. It is written at a point when the
identity of the region has been understood, even if not defined, and
therefore events tend to lead up to this identity. The geography and
topography help in the definition. The construction of the region
includes pointers of change, which become apparent from about
the late first millennium ad: the establishing of the state in the
newly emerging kingdoms; forms of political economy different
52 Ibid., 8.107ff.
53 Ibid., 7.1715–16.
Vaṃśāvalīs: Chronicles of Place and Person 617
from the earlier ones; the acculturation of the region to caste and
Puranic religion; the coming of literacy and the interface between
mainstream culture and local culture, the mārga and the deśī; and
new styles of architecture and sculpture.
Space having been contoured, there remained the problem of
time, and this was more complex. The sources used were not al­
ways meticulous about time and often the contradiction between
yugas (ages) and samvats (eras) required some manipulation of the
succession, whether genealogical or dynastic. There was always
the temptation of telescoping, removing some names, and padding
by adding names when constructing genealogies. Editing of this
kind was common to the form, which is seldom tightly structured,
since its function is not limited to chronology. The concern with
status was often more central.
The format of the Rājataraṅgiṇī follows that of most vaṃśāvalīs.
The narrative begins with an origin myth relating to the region.
Connections are made with the early kṣatriya heroes of the Purā-
ṇas to provide a link with the main Puranic tradition. The narrat­
ive then moves to listing early kings that are believed to be local,
with indications of a Sramanic presence. This gradually gives way
to dynasties, with descriptions of greater detail for more recent
dynasties. Independent statehood is claimed by the taking of royal
titles, but the more effective indicators are conquests, such as those
of Lalitāditya and Avantivarman (which seem like digvijayas),
or making marriage alliances with families of established status,
or building a magnificant temple which becomes a statement of
power.54 The focus of the narratives is usually on the king and this
gets sharper in contemporary times when the politics of opposition
also becomes more apparent. Kalhaṇa criticizes the oppression
of subjects by kings.55
Women intervening in the policies of kings is deplored, particu­
larly when kings were susceptible to their beauty to the extent of
one king making a woman of the lowest Domb caste his queen.56
Yet he does give space to queens such as Yaśovatī, Sugandhā,
54 Ibid., 4.183–207, 5.44, 7.299.
55 Ibid., 1.188, 7.1091–1115, 5.165–77.
56 Ibid., 5.387–9.
618 The Past Before Us
Sūryamatī, and of course much more to Diddā. Some bestowed
status on the royal family, others reduced the status. Politics was
not entirely a male preserve and even concubines had some say
in matters of state, especially when they involved questions of
regency and of collateral lines succeeding to the throne.57 Kalhaṇa
seems to suggest that the competition for the throne largely re­
sulted from the ambitions of women involved in this struggle.
Kalhaṇa’s social conservatism is apparent from his discussion
of high and low castes. The brāhmaṇas seem to divide easily into
three categories: the sāmanta-dvija, the brāhmaṇa intermediary
generally of the family of the recipient of an agrahāra; the puro-
hita pāriṣadyas, the brāhmaṇas who ran the temple corporations;
and the paṇḍits or scholars who could be dedicated to learning or
could be ministers, high officials, and even military commanders,
and play politics at the highest levels, organizing opposition to
the king.58 The purohita pariṣads were corporations of those who
were the brāhmaṇa administrators of the temple and its property,
and of places of pilgrimage which brought in a sizeable income.
They had common ownership of the properties, the fees, and
the endowments of these places. They were therefore extremely
rich, powerful, and politically influential.59 This allowed them to
confront kings and ministers, often threatening to fast to death, an
effective threat in a society that believed that causing the death of
a brāhmaṇa was a heinous sin.60
Kalhaṇa takes the granting of agrahāras back to the earliest
dynasties, presumably because he could not visualize a situa­
tion when they did not exist. The brāhmaṇas from Gandhāra he
categorizes as the lowest because they accepted agrahāras even
from Mihirakula.61 The propitiation of brāhmaṇas was necessary
because it was thought that they could cause the destruction of
the king by magical means and through witchcraft, and also by
expressing opposition to the king.62 Kalhaṇa describes the use of
the fast as an instrument of threat to the king, as it was also used
57 D. Rangachari, Invisible Women, Visible Histories, 83–191.
58 Rājataraṅgiṇī, 5.461–6, 7.12–13, 177, 675, 8.1071.
59 Ibid., 2.132, 5.465–6, 8.900.
60 Ibid., 8.898–900, 2224.
61 Ibid., 1.307.
62 Ibid., 1.272; 4.122–5.
Vaṃśāvalīs: Chronicles of Place and Person 619
in other regions. Opposition by the brāhmaṇas takes the form
of prāyopaveśa, a voluntary fast that would cause havoc should
the brāhmaṇa die. There is a hint of blackmail in this form of
opposition since it is not accompanied by a lengthy and appro­
priate preparation. Such a fast was attempted against Diddā but
failed because she bribed the brāhmaṇas.63 In the next reign both
brāhmaṇas and the pāriṣadyas fasted against Bhikṣācāra.64
Kalhaṇa’s description of the functioning of the king in a world of
Ḍāmaras and other political groups, and particularly the purohita
pariṣad, provides little evidence to justify the theory that there was
a separation of political and ritual power, and that ritual power
was predominant in the peripheries of the kingdom and political
power in the centre; or that the relations between ritual and power
are best understood by seeing them through the heavy emphasis
on symbolism and the practice of ritual.65 The brāhmaṇas of the
pariṣads and the agrahāras drew an income primarily from the
land they controlled, and much less from their control over ritual.
Land made them so wealthy that they became a target for the
Ḍāmaras. Their power was based on their intervention in politics,
not as ritual specialists but as landowners: hence their being called
sāmanta-dvijas.
Kalhaṇa, being himself a brāhmaṇa, nevertheless holds these
brāhmaṇas in contempt, both for accepting the patronage of sub­
standard kings and for making this their claim to power.66 At the
popular level the respect and fear of the brāhmaṇa arose as much
from his status as from his wealth as a landowner, and the power
this brought, as also from the fear of the curse of the brāhmaṇa.
Brahmanical sects were competing for royal patronage on the
one hand, but were incorporating popular local practice into
their beliefs and practices to acquire wider support. One of the
manifestations of this was the assimilation of Tantric belief and
practice into the conventional practices of the sects.67
63 Ibid., 6.335–40.
64 Ibid., 8.768–75.
65 B. Stein, “The Segmentary State in South Indian History”, 3–51; R. Inden,
“Hierarchies of Kings in Medieval India”, 99–125.
66 K. Mohan, Early Medieval History of Kashmir, 217.
67 A. Sanderson, “Religion and the State: Śaiva Officiants in the Territory of
the King’s Brahmanical Chaplain”, 229–300.
620 The Past Before Us
The confrontation of religious sects and their involvement in the
politics of the kingdom is also laid bare in another text of the late
ninth century, the play Āgama-ḍambara by Bhaṭṭa Jayanta, with
which Kalhaṇa is likely to have been familiar.68 The play dates
to the reign of Śaṅkaravarman. Jayanta was known for his com­
mentaries on Nyāya philosophy and discussions on the centrality
of logic. This may have encouraged the satire of the play.
The leading character in the play, Saṅkarṣaṇa, is hostile to the
Buddhists, Jainas, and Cārvākas, as well as to the Śaiva Nīlām-
baras. The presence of the Cārvākas as materialists is interesting
since they hardly figure in most brahmanical texts. Not only is
the relationship of these sects extremely problematic, but there is
the additional role of the Vaiṣṇava Bhāgavatas, also patronized at
the time by the queen and some members of the court. This is not
unusual, since factions in the royal courts each supported different
sectarian views. The debate in the play takes strongly opposing
positions. Finally, a way is suggested that allows the validity of
variant views, provided none supports overthrowing the social
order. But this is the crux of the matter, since the varṇa ordering
of society was at issue, among other things.
Kalhaṇa observes a social distance with the lower castes. Even
when praising the hydraulic engineering of Suyya, he mentions
Suyya being a śūdra.69 His intention seems to have been to empha­
size Suyya’s innate intelligence, which led him to such an unusual
solution and eventually a high position. Elsewhere he states that
a king took a Śvapāka woman as his wife—which led to the rise
in status of the low-caste Śvapākas. He asks what could have
happened to the gods that they permitted her to enter the temple,
adding that the brāhmaṇas who allowed this were committing a
sin.70 He refers to some categories of people as impure, such as a
queen that came from the Domb community, and the Gāndhāras,
the Khasas from the mountains, the Bhauṭṭa from Tibet, and the
Dārada.71 The Dārada of the trans-Himalayan region are said to
speak an unfamiliar tongue, which makes them alien.72
68 Bhaṭṭa Jayanta, Much Ado About Religion.
69 Rājataraṅgiṇī, 5.73–4, 80–91, 110–12.
70 Ibid., 5.387–94.
71 Ibid., 1.312–17.
72 Rājataraṅgiṇī, 8.2762–4. Recent work on the Dardic language points to it
Vaṃśāvalīs: Chronicles of Place and Person 621
According to Kalhaṇa the contestation for power began to in­
clude a wider range of people from about the eighth century ad.
There was of course the traditional fear of princes overthrowing
their father, a caution first articulated in the Arthaśāstra, which
compares princes to crabs who eat their parents.73 Kalhaṇa lists a
variety of reasons which may cause disaffection between father
and son. In these the roles of wives and stepmothers are as signifi­
cant as that of ministers, brothers, and evil­minded persons.74
Kalhaṇa states that the contenders for power over a period of
time were the Ḍāmaras, a term peculiar to Kashmir, but as a socio-
economic entity found in many regions at this time. They were
wealthy and powerful landowners anxious to control royal power
and ready to revoke grants to temples and appropriate them.75
Some began as ordinary householders but increased their power
by either setting up strongholds on their land or taking over those
of others. Since many of these were in the fertile portions of the
valley, their success was guaranteed. Their resort to lawlessness
led to their being disliked both by officials and brāhmaṇas. Their
rise in social status is probably indicated by their marrying wives
from among the local aristocracy and giving their daughters to
the royal family.76 During the reign of Avantivarman they ap­
propriated the villages donated to a temple, and on another occa­
sion they defeated the Tantrins whilst assisting Cakravarman to
regain the throne; later they assassinated the king.77 Conflict with
the reigning kings continued, including a rising of the Ḍāmaras
against Jayasimha and confrontations with Harṣa in the eleventh
century. They were subdued finally by Uccala, who followed
this act by magnanimous donations, which makes one wonder
whether Kalhaṇa is implying that the king seized the lands of the
Ḍāmaras.78 Clearly, those who had the potential to oppress were
also the ones who had the power to revolt.
being among the early Indo­Aryan languages, but it seemed unfamiliar at that
time to speakers of another Indo­Aryan language.
73 Arthaśāstra, 1.17.4–5.
74 Rājataraṅgiṇī, 7.678.
75 Ibid., 5.48ff., 7.494ff.
76 Kalhaṇa’s Rājataraṅgiṇī, vol. II, 304ff., Note G-IV.348.
77 Rājataraṅgiṇī, 5.51–2, 306, 406–13.
78 Ibid., 7.154, 576–9, 1227–8, 8.991, 1157, 3129ff.
622 The Past Before Us
Revolts against the king by the Ḍāmaras and by other interme­
diaries are clearly of serious concern to Kalhaṇa, who sees them
almost as an ongoing confrontation of the previous couple of
centuries.79 This is not an unusual condition in the political struc­
tures of North Indian kingdoms of this period and needs greater
attention than it has received. Not only was there wealth to recruit
private armies, the Ḍāmaras were also well armed.80 Kalhaṇa calls
them dasyus who destroyed whatever they could.81 The same term
was used for the Kaivartas, who rebelled against the Pāla king.
As makers and breakers of royalty who intervened in the flow of
political authority, keeping track of them in a historical narrative
would have been problematic.
The repeated intervention of the Ekāṅgas, Tantrins, and Ḍāma-
ras in high­level politics, and the determination with which they
tried to control the royal court, is a striking aspect in Kalhaṇa’s
account. The idea of maṇḍala in the politics of the hill states
remains somewhat tangential, perhaps because intermediaries
were less deeply grounded in territories from where they could
aspire to create their own kingdoms. In Kashmir the intention was
to intervene in the politics of the court and gain power through
that process, by tring to overthrow the ruling family. That seems
to have been the pattern by which the first Lohara dynasty came
to power.
If Kalhaṇa protested against the power of the Ḍāmaras and des-
cribed them as the scourge of the land, he was also hostile to the
kāyasthas, who used literacy and administrative positions to build
their strength in the hierarchy of power. As with the brāhmaṇas,
kāyasthas were invited to Kashmir and many families came
from the Ganges plain in search of employment. The land which
had earlier been plundered by Ḍāmaras was now being severely
punished by the administration of the kāyasthas—whom Kalhaṇa
refers to as a plague on the people,82 and are the ones who manipu­
late kings and policies. The king Śaṅkaravarman, whom Kalhaṇa
79 Ibid., 5.395ff., 447, 6.354, 7.223, 404ff.
80 Ibid., 8.709.
81 Ibid., 8.991, 1157.
82 Ibid., 5.439.
Vaṃśāvalīs: Chronicles of Place and Person 623
describes as “the foremost among fools”, is said to have oppressed
his subjects and plundered temples because he had fallen into the
hands of kāyasthas.83 Harṣa tormented his subjects through the
fines and taxes imposed by the kāyasthas.84 Again, it is Uccala
who ridicules the kāyasthas, and especially the most powerful
among them, Sadda, who was in control of the treasury and was
accused of intrigue against the king.85 Sadda is said to be the son
of a lower-caste load-carrier, and obviously Kalhaṇa is not taken
in by any subsequent origin myths of the kāyasthas.
Kalhaṇa was writing of a time that had seen disturbed condi­
tions. His history therefore becomes a record of events as viewed
by a member of the ruling elite whose family had been close to
court circles, but who himself seems to have distanced himself
from the powerful factions, his opposition to these being evident.
This in part accounts for a change in historical explanation. From
the Kārkoṭa dynasty onwards, his narrative reads as a relatively
down­to­earth history of Kashmir, even critical at times, in which
political factors are balanced with a variety of other fairly rational
explanations. It is also intended to underline the importance of
rājanīti (political concerns) in arguing that a strong king is nec­
essary to protect the subjects and stating by implication that few
such had ruled Kashmir in his time.
Resort to the supernatural and the mystical is not absent in his
explanations of the course of events but occurs with rather more
frequency in the earlier books.86 The last book sees a fading out
of such explanations and politics is discussed in terms of the per­
sonalities involved and their ambitions: the king; the feudatories,
the Ḍāmaras, the politics of the brāhmaṇas and kāyasthas; and
the economic conditions of the peasant at the receiving end of
oppression by all these.
This is not to say, however, that his work is so strongly historical
in the modern sense as to negate the occasional intervention of
Fate.87 The term which he uses for Fate, vidhātṛ, could also imply
83 Ibid., 5.180–1.
84 Ibid., 7.1226.
85 Ibid., 8.258, 276ff., 298–308, 443.
86 Ibid., 1.165, 179–81, 259, 333, 2.17–55, 4.101–5, 6.185.
87 Ibid., 7.67, 916–17, 1187, 8.1811, 2999.
624 The Past Before Us
the Creator, and therefore divinity. Inevitably, there is a belief in
divine retribution. A certain moralistic element runs through the
narrative as well, but surfaces only occasionally. Thus he says,
“In order to enjoy pleasures, which on account of the preceding
evil deeds yield no enjoyment, the wicked destroy the virtuous
as the young camels destroy the ketaka tree in order to get at its
thorns.”88 Yet overall his is an independent position which he
defends with arguments.
Kalhaṇa’s purpose is to establish places and times of kings as
against fluctuating and conflicting tradition; to set out the ac­
tions of those that govern; to please and entertain his readers by
descriptions of the past; to give his readers food for thought on
the impermanence of things, thereby encouraging resignation.89
The latter suggests an attitude inspired by Buddhist thinking: it
is interesting that, in spite of the disappearance of Buddhism, its
imprint on the minds of the thoughtful remained. The profession
of a historian was not seen as a distinct and separate profession.
The historian was regarded as a kavi (poet). The Rājataraṅgiṇī is
therefore treated as a mahākāvya by later writers, even if its style is
far less ornate and embellished as compared to other mahākāvyas.
Some brahmanical norms are conceded. The king’s karma can af­
fect historical events and is linked to the karma of his people; thus,
good kings arise because of the merits of the people and meritori­
ous action lies in the observance of brahmanical norms.90
Woven into this is the theory of the four yugas and the pro­
gressive decay of all things. The turmoil of more recent times
was almost expected. A hint of the world turned upside down in
the Kaliyuga hovers in the background of factions and feudatory
revolts. Yet the events recorded are dated not in the Kaliyuga but
in the more commonly used Laukika era.
That Kashmir had been intellectually vibrant over the couple
of centuries before Kalhaṇa is evident from the quality of thought
and writing of authors based there. A likely reason is that there
had been for a while a migration of the learned to Kashmir. A
88 Ibid., trans. M.A. Stein, 4.113.
89 A.L. Basham, “Kalhana and his Chronicle”.
90 Rājataraṅgiṇī, 1.158, 161, 324.
Vaṃśāvalīs: Chronicles of Place and Person 625
tradition of learning seems to have been established through the
presence and work of many scholars. Not that their writings would
have necessarily lent themselves to the genre of vaṃśāvalīs, but
at least they created an ambience of intellectual curiosity of the
kind which is evident in the chronicle.
The tradition of writing chronicles continued in Kashmir with
those of Jonarāja, Śrīvara, Prajyabhaṭṭa, Śuka, and Dāmodara
Paṇḍita, among others. Jonarāja continued his account of the
period subsequent to Kalhaṇa’s text, from Jayasimha to the reign
of the Sultan Zayn-al-‘Ābidin. It has been plausibly argued that
Śrīvara’s “Jaina Rājataraṅgiṇī” is a reference to Zayn, and its
contents would support this proposition.91 But these were not of
the quality of Kalhaṇa’s work, neither in their writing nor in their
understanding of the past.
91 W. Slaje, “A Note on the Genesis and Character of Śrīvara’s So-Called
Jaina-Rājataraṅgiṇī”, 379–88.
16
The Chamba Vaṃśāvalī
1. The Area
The less-known vaṃśāvalī from Chamba is another example
of the chronicles of this period. Although of the same
genre, it is a contrast to the Rājataraṅgiṇī in language
and quality of thought. Chamba in the western Himalaya was a
small hill state comprising the upper reaches of the Ravi river and
touching the Chenab river. Apart from the succession of rulers and
events, other significant processes of change are implicit in the
vaṃśāvalī, such as the formation of the kingdom, the emergence
of intermediaries, the transition to a caste society, and the coming
of Puranic Hinduism. States that were neighbours of Kashmir,
and had relationships with the kingdoms in the vicinity, vacillated
from independence to occasional subservience. They attempted to
maintain vaṃśāvalīs; that of Chamba is the most coherent.
The earlier focus of the text was the settlement at Brahmaur in
the upper reaches of the Ravi. This area, though seemingly iso-
lated, was connected by routes in various directions—to Kishtwar,
Jammu, and Kangra with access to the plains of Kashmir and
Punjab, and others via the Manimahesha lake and Trilokanath
to Lahul and Kulu.1 The passes were connected with the higher
1 J.Ph. Vogel, Antiquities of Chamba State, vol. I; B.Ch. Chhabra, Antiquities
of Chamba State, vol. II, is substantially devoted to the inscriptions from the
area starting in the fourteenth century ad. Earlier sources of various kinds are
discussed in volume I. See also Chamba District Gazetteer, 1963; A. Cunning-
ham, ASIR 1872–3, vol. V; V.C. Ohri (ed.), History and Culture of the Chamba
State; M. Sharma, “State Formation and Cultural Complex in Western Himalaya:
Chamba, Genealogy and Epigraphs 700–1650 ce”, 387–432.
The Chamba Vaṃśāvalī 627
002
0
sertemoliK
)71
dna
61
.sphc(
seitsanyD
dna
,snalC
,secalP tnatropmI
eroM
eht
fo
snoitacoL
:7
paM
E
G
N
A
R
A
Y
A
A L agnaG
M
I
H noS
T A
E
R
G
a
m Indus Ganga awteB
e K a r a k o r Beas Yamuna labm ahC g n a R a y
h
d
uhdniS n iV Tapi
h
s
u
mulehJ banehC ivaR
jeltuS
adam
raN
K Kabul
u
d
egnaR
nam
ia
n lu
S
i H
sudnI
dnamleH
RIMHSAK
HKADAL ihclA
RAWTHSIK
LUBAK
ruamharB
UMMAJ
T
E
B
I
T
obaT
LUHAL
ABMAHC
ITIPS
A R R U GN PR A U K N
ILOHSAB
IHLED
anat.āpalihanA
ATAKLOK
ART.S.ĀRUAS
IHBALAV
yabmaC
ahtānamoS
idanahaM
71
dna
61
retpahC
,7
paM
628 The Past Before Us
Himalaya and to infrequently used routes along the ranges. Brah -
maur came to be called Gaderan—the habitat of the Gaddi
sheph erds known to various parts of the western Himalaya. Pastor-
alists practising transhumance would in summer have moved up
to the Manimahesha Pass linking the Ravi valley with the Beas
valley. At the turn of the first millennium ad, when the state was
established, the location of the capital moved down to a lower
elevation on the plateau of Chamba. The proximity of Chamba to
Kashmir resulted in historical connections, sometimes close, but
also with occasional brief periods of the subordination of Chamba.
A paucity of coins suggests that trade remained an exchange of
goods in the more remote valleys. The larger markets handling
both agricultural produce and goods from more distant areas,
would have been in Chamba and at entry points to the plains.
Referred to in the inscriptions as Cāmpā or Campaka, the town
of Chamba, after which the kingdom was named, was located on a
fertile plateau above the junction of the Ravi and Saho rivers. The
valleys branching off were generally held by rāṇās, intermediaries
who were under the suzerainty of the king of Chamba.
2. The Narrative Before the Coming
of the State
The Chamba vaṃśāvalī lists the succession of rulers of Chamba
coming down to the seventeenth century, closing with the war
between Chamba and Nurpur (to the south) in 1642. It appears to
be incomplete and therefore may have carried the story further
in time, but that part is unavailable.
The work is not just a genealogical roll, as it has been called
by earlier scholars, since it considers other features that affect
kingship. It may not be an exact chronicle, but it does record a
historical process. Its authorship is unknown. The final version, as
we have it, comes from the family of the rājaguru of the kingdom
of Chamba. It is unclear whether it was composed afresh in the
seventeenth century, or whether the data was collected from vari-
ous sources (such as other brief chronicles and inscriptions) and
put together at this time. The text itself suggests the latter, since
no court poet would have claimed it as his kāvya. The intention of
The Chamba Vaṃśāvalī 629
the genealogy was probably to present a seamless descent from the
beginning, although it unwittingly shows breaks at various points.
Chronicles claim to be historically accurate, but such a claim
cannot be taken literally—there are usually contradictions with
other sources. The intention of putting together a chronicle at a parti -
cular point, or updating and re-editing an existing one, usually has
a political purpose. The significance of the chronicle is that it is
one perspective of the past; and, in this case, the version offered
is not seriously contradicted by other views.
Composed in Sanskrit, the vaṃśāvalī consists of 120 ślokas
(verses), but the quality of the language is poor and suggests a com-
position of the period when Sanskrit was declining in this region.
It claims, among its sources, the Bhāgavata and Skanda Purāṇas,
both late. The Bhāgavata Purāṇa drew on earlies ones, such as
the Viṣṇu Purāṇa, hence the repetition of some of the descent lists.
The early part of the narrative is drawn from these and contains
much that is mythological. Purāṇas were, as we have seen, read
and recited, and known to those regarded as learned, and their
genealogical sections were important as skeletal structures for
chronology. Inscriptions of various kinds, issued by most rulers,
were doubtless additional sources on the past within the work.
It has been argued that the author must have relied on inscrip-
tions for data on the rulers of Chamba, particularly from about
the eleventh century onwards, since the order of succession is
largely common to both. The language often tends to be ungram-
matical. Another possibility is that there was a version in the
local Chambiyali language, referred to as the bansauli. An Urdu
version, probably composed for the Mughal court, has also been
mentioned, but would have been very late. Another Sanskrit copy,
said to have been in the family of the rājaguru of the Chamba royal
family, was destroyed in a fire.2 Unlike Kalhaṇa, the author of this
chronicle is not named. He was evidently a brāhmaṇa belonging
to Chamba and attached to the court, since other than the lists of
kings and dynasties there is some information on grants made for
pious acts, miracles, and the efficacy of austerities.
The vaṃśāvalī was in part a document for the court and the royal
2 J.Ph. Vogel, Antiquities of Chamba State, vol. I, 78ff.
630 The Past Before Us
family, and in part a history on how Chamba came to be what it
is. Its more recent authorship, if it had more than a single author,
would have remained in the family of the rājaguru, passed on from
generation to generation for updating, the text being treated as a
part of the patrimony.
The Chamba vaṃśāvalī can be seen as consisting of three
sections (although the author of the text does not make this divi -
sion). The three observe the format of the vaṃśānucarita of the
Purāṇa. The first discusses origin myths and descent from the
gods as claimed for royal lineages. The second has a rather garbled
account of earlier rulers, borrowing from the kṣatriya descent
lists of the Purāṇas, although the selection of names is somewhat
arbitrary, such as Ikṣvāku, Pṛthu, Mandhātṛ, Trasadasyu, Sagara,
Raghu, Daśaratha, Rāma, Kuśa, Atithi; and the Puranic forms
of expressing succession, such as ātmaja (born from), or tastut
(from), are also used. The third section provides the evidence for
the establishing of the kingdom and the dynasty/dynasties that
ruled. Initially the more important kings are listed, but subse-
quently it mentions virtually all. Genealogies play an important
role in reflecting the politics of the present in terms of whom the
authors select and whom they leave out. They draw on the past
for providing a prologue, even if it has to be constructed afresh,
and they thereby invest in the future.
The text begins with an invocation of the Guru—om śrī gurve
namaḥ and praise of the Creator, Nārāyaṇa. The rulers of Cham-
ba are said to be of the Sūryavaṃśa or the Ādityavaṃśā, the
Solar lineage of the Purāṇas. The text states that “the garland
of Sūryavaṃśa is wound round the neck of Nārāyaṇa.” Descent
therefore is traced from Nārāyaṇa via Brahmā, Kaśyapa, and vari-
ous ṛṣis to Manu. Stories from the Vedic corpus are included to
give the document a stamp of learning. From Manu it moves to
his eldest son Ikṣvāku, and draws in familiar characters ending up
with Daśaratha, Rāma, and Kuśa. The descent then follows Rāma’s
son Kuśa and includes a curious list of names—Atithi (literally, a
guest), Niṣadha, Nala, and eventually Hiraṇyanābha.
Hiraṇyanābha’s descendant revived the Sūryavaṃśa which had
gone into decline although we are not told why. All this it would
seem was before the Mahābhārata war, since a later member of
The Chamba Vaṃśāvalī 631
the line is said to have been killed by Abhimanyu at the “batle of
the Bharatas”. Other descendenats include the later Ikṣvākus, such
as Śākya, Śuddodhana, Lāṅgala, and so on until the list comes to
the childless Sumitra.
The attempt in this section is to make two connections with the
mainstream mārga tradition: one is a link with the succession lists
in the Purāṇas; the other is the appropriation of the Mahābhārata
tradition by associating one of the earlier local kṣatriyas with par-
ticipating in the war, a technique known to other areas and other
times as well. Furthermore, this introduction seeks to provide the
region with a history dating to the earliest period of the historical
tradition.
After a break of many years, according to the narrative, there
comes the rājā Marū, who is a yogasiddha (one proficient in yoga),
who marries the daughter of a king and fathers a number of sons.
This suggests a new line, should an earlier one have existed. He
settles one son in the village of Kalāpa and the rest in various other
places in the Himalayas, and proceeds with his eldest son to Kash-
mir, where his son is anointed ruler of Varmapura/?Brahmapura/
Brahmaur. Subsequent to this, Marū wanders away. He appears
to have been a minor chief in a subordinate political relationship
with Kashmir.
His initial association in the locality was with sects of a trans-
regional kind, such as the yogīs, who had a sizeable following in
the western Himalayas. Such sects often invoked local practices,
or those associated with non-brahmana belief, but also had affili-
ations to wider and older sectarian groups linked to Śaiva and
Śākta cults. The local tradition is now added to the Puranic source.
Marū’s association with yogīs and his eventual disappearance sug -
gest a break in the succession, or a cover-up for Marū having been
superseded by a new contender for power. Adventurers often tie
up with wandering religious teachers, for they can help in provid-
ing popular support.
Marū’s son, Jayastambha, through whom the succession de-
volves, was brought up in Kashmir, an indication that the family
were subordinate intermediaries in the kingdom of Kashmir, or
else that an aspirant from Kashmir was sent to this area. A later
descendant, Ajayavarman, also a yogī, does tapasya at Brahmaur,
632 The Past Before Us
which results in the magical appearance of liṅgas. This leads him
to renunciation. He anoints his son Meruvarman as rājā, for the
good of the state (rājyasiddhaye), but the paternal link is ambi-
guous.
Meruvarman’s act of sanskritization in establishing his cre-
dentials was to ask his Kashmiri guru to install metal images of
Narasiṃha, Ganeśa, and Nandi, at Brahmaur, inscribing the latter
with his rājaśāsanam (royal commands).3 Prior to this there ap-
pear to have been wooden temples for a number of deities, such
as Lakṣaṇādevī and Śaktidevī, all significantly devīs (goddesses),
as was customary in many rural areas, especially in the uplands.
Devī worship seems to have prevailed in the area, onto which was
imposed the worship of Śiva. This would mark the entry of Puranic
sects. The temples too conformed to the local pent-roof style of
three-storeys.4 The sculptor of the metal images refers to himself
as Gugga, a non-Sanskritic name. The switch from wooden to stone
temples was in imitation of mainstream architecture in Kashmir
and the plains.
The suffix varman is perhaps a claim to kṣatriya caste. Later
inscriptions of intermediaries suggest that Meruvarman raised the
status of the family. He is described as belonging to the Āditya-
vaṃśa—the Solar line—and the moṣūṇa gotra. The inscriptions
are composed in faulty Sanskrit and have been dated palaeo-
graphically to about the eighth century ad, on the basis of which
Meruvarman has also been dated to the same century, although this
may be a little too early since he is separated from Jayastambha
by ten generations.
His grandson, Lakṣmīvarman, suffered two misfortunes: one
was a pestilence in which large numbers died and the other an
attack by the neighbouring Kīra tribes in which he himself was
killed. It is not certain whether the Kīras were from Ladakh and
Tibet, as would seem likely, or from the Kīragrāma. This provides
a break, ending the second section. This more legendary part of
the chronicle gives way to a narrative with some precision. We
are now introduced to the origin myth of the dynasty, with which
the future kings of Chamba are associated.
3 Some of these images can still be seen at Brahmaur.
4 H. Goetz, The Early Wooden Temples of Chamba.
The Chamba Vaṃśāvalī 633
The widowed queen of Lakṣmīvarman, being pregnant, was
rescued by the ministers and went into hiding in the mountains,
where she gave birth to a son and was taken care of by the brāh­
maṇa purohita of the family. She placed her son in a cave (guha),
where they lived for a while. The ministers were secretly informed
about the birth of an heir. The family priest took the queen and
her son to a neighbouring state, where for some time they lived
incognito with the mlecchas (tribal people and low castes) until
they were recognized. Then the rājā of nearby Sukheta received
them with hospitality and honour. The young boy, when of age,
married the rājā’s daughter and was given the village of Pangi,
eventually to become a part of the Chamba kingdom. Assistance
with wealth and an army helped him destroy the Kīras and get
back his inherited status.
He ruled as Mūṣaṇavarman, establishing the possibly new
dynasty of the Mūṣaka-vaṃśa, thereby also indicating the inde-
pendence of the family from the overlordship of Kashmir, but
claiming links with the earlier ruler, Meruvarman. The name
Mūṣūṇa/Moṣūṇa, although it goes back as a gotra name to the
time of Meruvarman, has to be explained, and this explanation is
associated with the birth of Mūṣaṇavarman.
The story of his birth is curious because it is stereotypical of
many origin myths in the subcontinent during the late first mil-
lennium ad. Guha, meaning a cave or something hidden, is fre-
quently associated with those beyond the social pale, the people
of the forest. Tribal connections hover in the background of all
variants of the story. This perhaps reflects a break in descent and
the coming to power of another family. The popular explanation
for the name, but not given in the chronicle, is that whilst in the
cave as a child he was guarded by mice (mūṣaka).5 Strangely, the
more obvious connection of the mūṣaka as the vehicle of Ganeśa
is not made despite Ganeśa being one of the deities whose image
was set up at Brahmaur. That this marks the use of a dynastic
name for the ruling family suggests acknowledged kingship. This
echoes the pattern of the Puranic vaṃśānucarita, where in the
third section, with its lists of dynasties, legitimacy was perceived
as coming through political power rather than genealogical links.
5 J.Ph. Vogel, Antiquities of Chamba State, vol. I, 96ff.
634 The Past Before Us
An inscription of one of the king’s feudatories refers to him as be-
ing of the moṣūṇādityavaṃśa. That the myth was reintroduced at
a later point in time was doubtless for it to be a time-marker and
to highlight the activities of Mūṣaṇavarman.6
Mūṣaka as a dynastic name is also known from the history of
the Guhila Rajputs of Mewar;7 further away, the Mūṣaka-vaṃśa
refers to a ruling family in Kerala. The Mūṣakavaṃśa­kāvya re-
lating to the Ay dynasty ruling in the Eli region of Malabar was
composed by Atula, who was attached to the Cera court, in the
eleventh century.8 As the name of a people, mūṣaka/mūṣika occurs
frequently in the Purāṇas. If Meruvarman’s gotra was linked to
this name, he need not have been a local person.
In each case the story involved a widowed but pregnant kṣatriya
queen fleeing from enemies, protected by a brāhmaṇa, giving
birth to a son in a cave. Added to this was an association involv-
ing a mouse with some underlying importance. Eventually, the
young boy is brought up among tribal peoples, with whose aid the
throne is regained.9 What is curious is not the occurrence of the
word as a name in various distant regions, but the similarities in
the myths of origin. Was this story consciously carried by bards
and brāhmaṇas to various parts of the subcontinent, making it
common to many origin myths?
Interestingly, the root *mūṣ can also be used for the word
mūṣaka, to mean a thief or a plunderer. Was this a memory of
how local people viewed the intrusion of a new family claiming
6 Vogel has suggested that mauṣaṇa could perhaps be read as pauṣaṇa,
linking it to Puṣān. The pa and ma are similar in the script. But he recognized
that there was a grammatical problem in this reading: J.Ph. Vogel, Antiquities
of Chamba State, vol. I, 97–8, 164, 197, 141ff. They are unlikely to have had a
solar gotra and a solar vaṃśa.
7 Ep. Ind., 39, 191ff.
8 Ganapati Rao, “Extracts from the Mushika-vaṃśam”, 87–113; M.G.S.
Narayanan, “Mūṣakavaṃśa-kāvya of Atula”, 301–10; S. Aiyer, “An Unidentified
Territory of South India”, 161–75; G. Warriar, “Studies in the Mūṣaka-vaṃśa”, 7,
2, 118–31 and 8, 1, 9–36; N.P. Unis, A History of Mūṣikavaṃśa. A name similar to
mūṣaka also occurs in Strabo, quoting Onesicritus, who describes the Musikenoi
near the Indus delta: Geography of Strabo, 15.1.21.
9 R. Thapar, “The Mouse in the Ancestry”, in idem, Cultural Pasts, 797–
806.
The Chamba Vaṃśāvalī 635
greater rights, and appropriating a larger share in a society earlier
characterized by economic reciprocity? Was this action viewed as
theft? The establishment of the state sharpens the divide between
those who produce and those who appropriate. The existing order
appears to have been disrupted and control over land obtained
through violent means. The mouse in the ancestral myth may
have been invented to provide a socially acceptable explanation
of the word when its meaning of plunder or theft became embar-
rassing.
Possibly Meruvarman was the adventurer who was given or
took the gotra name. The mouse could have been the totem of his
clan. Mūṣaṇavarman need not have been of the same lineage but
sought a connection with the earlier line. The popular story would
then have grown around him.10 The later inscriptions of Āsaṭa
refer not to the gotra but to mauṣaṇa­kulaika­tikkaḥ, which gives
a slightly different identity. Reference is also made to mūṣaṇa
vaṃśa bhūṣaṇa maṇi. Elsewhere, moṣaṇa occurs as a name and
is differentiated from Ādityavaṃśa, moṣaṇāmnaya ādityavaṃśa.11
There is a change from gotra to vaṃśa to kula to a name.
3. The State Emerges
According to the Chamba vaṃśāvalī, five generations after Mūṣaṇa-
varman came Sāhilavarman making a strong imprint of king-
ship. He and his successors were exalted by their royal titles—
paramabhaṭṭāraka mahārājādhirāja parameśvara. Associated with
this is the epithet deva, which has been translated as “divine”, or,
“of divine descent”, but could be the term used for the king. This
is an indication of a pronounced change of status. The chronicle
now corroborates other sources. He is said to have defeated the
kṣatriyas, presumably the feudatories, and founded the town of
10 V.C. Ohri has made a similar suggestion, but on other grounds: Sculpture
of the Western Himalayas: History and Stylistic Development.
11 Thundhu Copper-plate Inscription of Āsaṭa, in J.Ph. Vogel, Antiquities of
Chamba State, vol. I, 147; Chamba Copper-plate of Anandavarman, in ibid., vol.
II, 41; Sungal Copper-plate of Vidagdha, in ibid., vol. I, 164; Kulait Copper-
plate, in ibid., 184.
636 The Past Before Us
Campā which he settled as the capital, adorning it with temples.
As a location it was an improvement on Brahmaur since it was
centrally situated in a wider valley at a lower elevation and
controlled access to other valleys and to the plains further away. A
royal capital would be the seat of the court and of the administra-
tion, both of which presupposed some agrarian and commercial
expansion. The shift to a broader valley provided more land for
cultivation and for making grants. The state of Chamba was taking
shape. The guardian deity of the town was the goddess Campāvatī,
who had killed the Mahiṣāsura. Other temples, such as those to
Candreśvara and Kurmeśvara, were also built at Campā.
The larger state of Chamba incorporated the smaller earlier one
of Brahmaur. The vagueness of the earlier succession gives way
to a well-formed idea of a dynasty. The narrative is now directed
towards a presumed history with indicators of change—the shift
to Chamba, the administration of a state, the centrality of caste
norms, the presence of Vaiṣṇava temples, the marked status of
the king as superior to the feudatories, his genealogical claims
which carry the imprint of mythical times. The grants of land to
brāhmaṇas increases from this time, indicating a stable state.
Sāhilavarman is closely associated with the yogīs and was him-
self accomplished in yoga since both he and his wife performed the
required austerities. Eighty-four siddhas, the conventional number,
are said to have appeared and there is some mention of their being
from the south—dakṣine yogasiddhe. The marker of eighty-four
siddhas comes first with Marū, again when the kingdom is taking
shape, and then again with Sāhilavarman when it is established.
The number eighty-four was because it was considered auspicious
and the blessing of the siddhas is a different kind of legitimacy
from that bestowed by brāhmaṇas. They granted him a boon of
ten sons. The yogī Carpaṭi/Carpaṭa, the most renowned among
them, became his perceptor and the king established a sanctuary
for him. Carpaṭa was known to the Nātha cult which was a mix
of esoteric Buddhism, Yogic Śaivism, and other ideas. This was
a channel through which notions of magic and the supernatural
entered the more conservative forms of religion. Such groups
were generally linked to low-caste priests and practised rituals of
The Chamba Vaṃśāvalī 637
birth, illness, and death.12 They had small shrines to begin with,
but when their popularity increased, so did the donations. It was
doubtless at this point that the brāhmaṇas muscled in and there
were some mutual adjustments.
Whereas the liṅgas conveyed the benediction of Śiva, the yogīs
introduced a concession to popular culture which did not neces-
sarily conform to the Sanskritic. That the succession had to go
through sons born as a boon could be a hint of a break. Neverthe-
less, the Sanskritic mainstream was given appropriate emphasis.
Sāhilavarman sought validation by building a temple to Viṣṇu.
This required a special image to be sculpted from stone, only
obtainable in the Vindhyas. He sent his nine sons to the plains,
asking them to bring an unsullied, flawless, white stone from the
Vindhyas. The stone they brought was unacceptable to the guru,
who said that it had a frog inside, as indeed upon examination this
was so. The sons were sent out again, but while returning with a
fresh stone they were set upon by brigands and slain. The king then
sent his last but eldest son, Yugākāra, who killed the brigands and
returned with the stone. This stone was appropriate and was used
for the image of Viṣṇu in the main temple of the Lakṣmī Nārāyaṇa
complex, which the king constructed in Chamba. Sāhilavarman
installed his son Yugākāra as king. He himself joined the yogīs
and became an ascetic. Did he abdicate or was the throne usurped?
Events had come round full circle with the return of the yogīs and
their being joined by the king.
The inducting of Carpaṭa is not incidental. It has to do with the
state bringing together the various communities of the region into
a new identity. Carpaṭa is well known and mentioned in Buddhist
and Śākta sources as influential. The participation of Carpaṭa sug-
gests the continuation of some earlier practices and beliefs. The
Nātha cult to which these groups broadly subscribed drew together
the subalterns and the lower caste groups, although eventually they
had patrons among the elite.
12 M. Sharma, “Contested Claims: Land, Ritual and the Jogis of Charpaṭnath”,
488–510; D.G. White, The Alchemical Body: Siddha Traditions in Medieval
India, 81–4, 92–3.
638 The Past Before Us
Two elements in the story about the stone are important. One
is the establishment of Vaisnavism as the pre-eminent religious
base of a kingdom which would enable the newly risen monarchy
to reach out to wider geographical networks and alliances—hence
the stone from the Vindhyas—and to draw on a vast catchment
area of Vaiṣṇavas. The coming of Vaiṣṇava Bhagavatism coincided
with the expansion of the state of Chamba and, as elsewhere too,
it helped to integrate social groups even if it sought the patronage
of the elite. Its form of integration was to bring people into the
sectarian fold as a way of entering the mainstream. The network of
siddhas, although more flexible in assimilating beliefs, was initially
distanced from the mainstream. This changed when it entered elite
practices. The boon of ten sons given by the siddhas was in a sense
nullified by the demands of the Viṣṇu image, leaving the single
son and successor to bring it home. Vaisnavism would also enable
the court circles to draw on a range of mythology which, although
ostensibly religious, was also an endorsement of social hierarchy
and the recognition of an appropriate placement in society. This
would tie in with using the Bhāgavata Purāṇa as a source.
At another level the story legitimizes the succession of Yugākāra,
who may not have been the eldest son and may have run into
problems with rival claimants. The other competitors were conve-
niently dispatched in the story of the brigands. These events may
also reflect a tension between the siddhas and the Puranic religion
now being adopted by the royal court, and providing validation to a
new polity far removed from a clan society. The siddhas and yogīs
represent the first stage of acculturation between local religious
practice and that which came from the plains. Brāhmaṇas were
invited to settle by being given grants of land, which assisted the
process of acculturation.
This was also the period when in the trans-Himalaya, in Ladakh
and Zanskar and closer to Chamba, many Buddhist monasteries
were being established, such as at Alchi and Tabo, and Buddhist
texts translated into Tibetan. Some of this was under the direction
of scholars such as Rin chen bzang po, in the late tenth and early
eleventh century. Routes linking these areas, not only to Tibet but
to Central Asian trade as well, would have affected the economy of
the region. Traders from the plains and lower valleys would have
The Chamba Vaṃśāvalī 639
been anxious to use and maintain these routes. Problems with the
Kīras were not unconnected with these concerns.
Other sources state that, a couple of generations after Yugākāra,
Chamba was attacked by Kashmir and the reigning king replaced
by his son. This inaugurated intermittent periods of the subordina-
tion of Chamba to Kashmir. But these are not mentioned in the
Chamba vaṃśāvalī. It continues with a succession of kings, some
of whom issued inscriptions. Mention is made in the Rājataraṅgiṇī
of a rājā of Chamba, Āsaṭa, who together with others came to a
conclave in Kashmir in the late eleventh century.13 The Kashmir
chronicle does not refer to the Chamba rulers as sāmantas. A few
successors after Yugākāra saw Vijayavarman on the throne and
battling with the old enemies of Chamba, the Kīras, as also Kash-
mir. A new factor is referred to as the Mudgalas, which has been
interpreted as the Mughals; but this seems to be a mistake since
the Mughals came later, and it probably refers to an earlier group
of people.
Among the successors was Bhoṭavarman, a curious name since
Bhoṭa was the term used for people from Tibet. There is no indi-
cation of a break in the lineage or conquest and the name may
reflect some connections with Lahul and areas of Tibetan culture.
A Tibetan inscription near Brahmaur of uncertain date, but pos-
sibly of this period, refers to Markulai. This could have been the
well-known Tibetan monastery of Mar-skul.14 Bhoṭavarman’s
inscription of 1396 is bilingual, in Sanskrit and Chambiyali, with
mistakes in both languages.15
The more important among the later kings, which brings the
text to the sixteenth century, is Pratāpasiṃhavarman, said to be
the equal of Yudhiṣṭhira in this Kali age. He encouraged the suf-
fix of “siṃha/singh” rather than “varman”. No reason is given for
this being gradually taken up by later rulers. It could have been
an attempt to imitate the Rajput style of the plains as an assertion
of status without the myth of an Agnikula origin. It would have
13 Rājataraṅgiṇī, 7.588; 7.218.
14 Brahmor Rock Inscription, in J.Ph. Vogel, Antiquities of Chamba State,
vol. I, 252ff.
15 Mhesa Plate of Bhotavarman, B.Ch. Chhabra, Antiquities of Chamba State,
vol. II, 23.
640 The Past Before Us
widened the circle of marriage alliances now central to the poli-
tics of hill and plain. Or it could have been an attempt to play
politics with the new powers of the Sultanate and the Mughals,
in association with the Rajputs. The later ruler, Pṛthvīsiṃha, in
accordance with the Rajput pattern, was given a mansab of 1000
by the Mughals.
Pratāpasiṃhavarman is associated in the vaṃśāvalī with
restoring temples, particularly the Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa temple. But
before he could do so there was the problem of acquiring the
neces sary finances. He consulted his ministers on how he could
obtain the required resources without creating further burdens
for his subjects—prajāpīḍanam vinā. It could be that the tax was
already so high that it would have been difficult to increase it. The
chronicle maintains that, one night, Viṣṇu appeared to him in a
dream and assured him that finances for the restoration would be
provided for by the deity. On waking, the king was wondering
how this could happen, when a body of peasants brought him
some pieces of copper and reported the discovery of a copper
mine. With the wealth from the mine he is said to have restored
all the temples.
The significance of the story becomes evident from the next
statement, that it was during his rule that the state of Chamba
expanded its borders through conquest, and this expansion must
have consumed a large part of the treasury. He defeated the
neighbouring king of Nagar-kot, and returned home with much
booty as well as the revenue from the fertile valley and the lands
of the sāmantas.
Pratāpasiṃha’s great-grandson was Janārdana who battled with
the rājā Jagatsiṃha of Nurpur. Jagatsiṃha was the councillor and
representative of the lord of the Yavanas—yavanādhīśa—a refe -
rence to the Sultans and later to the Mughals. One might have
expected a disjuncture with the presence of the Yavanas but the
chronicle runs on without a break. The enemy remains the king-
dom of Nurpur.
Jagatsiṃha of Nurpur treacherously killed Janārdana, burnt his
land, carried off his wealth, and deprived his son of the kingdom.
Janārdana’s young son was Pṛthvīsiṃha, who took refuge in the
neighbouring mountains of Mandi and Kola. After some years,
The Chamba Vaṃśāvalī 641
Pṛthvīsiṃha, together with some feudatory chiefs who were his
allies, battled successfully against the army of Nurpur and regained
Chamba. He overpowered the rājā of Basholi as well, thus clearing
his access to the plains. He then set off to settle scores with the
representative of the Yavana. At this point the vaṃśāvalī breaks
off, remaining incomplete.
4. The Chronicle
The Chamba vaṃśāvalī was the chronicle of a relatively un-
important state, but its importance is as an illustration of the kind
of record maintained in such states. It covers a longer span of
time than most other lesser ones. The focus is on Chamba, and
occasionally on the powerful state of Kashmir. Lesser neighbours
come into prominence when Chamba begins to decline. The chro-
nology of the rulers is largely preserved, but this did not preclude
some shuffling.
There is much that is stated somewhat obliquely, and which
becomes a code that would have been familiar to those who read
it or heard it recited. It might be useful to read beyond the obvious,
but without importing too much speculation. It is therefore con-
ceived of differently from the more realistic and relatively precise
narrative and explanation given by Kalhaṇa in the Rājataraṅgiṇī.
Nevertheless, there is a recognizable pattern.
The imprint of the itihāsa­purāṇa tradition is evident, as is
the fact that the narrative records historical change. The need to
keep a chronicle may also have resulted from the influence of
monastic chronicles maintained in the Buddhist monasteries a
little further afield. As with the Rājataraṅgiṇī, the proximity of
Buddhism would have been a factor in encouraging a conscious-
ness of recording history. The Kashmir chronicle may well have
been an inspiration to lesser kingdoms, even if the result was not
of the same quality.
The descent of the family is traced to one of the two main vaṃśas
of the Purāṇas. The earlier names assumed to be chronologi-
cal give way to genealogy as part of dynastic succession in the
later part of the chronicle. The origin myth of the founder of the
dynasty suggests someone who might have been an adventurer
642 The Past Before Us
from elsewhere or a local chief asserting himself above others.
These activities give way to a move towards the norms of a state
and the structure of a kingdom. Succession is not a continuous
flow but attempts are made to cover up the disjunctures. The nar-
rative refers to a series of rulers and is similar to the praśasti in
inscriptions, where the reference is to the ruling family and not
just to a single ruler.
The kingdom has to expand its territory, especially with an in-
crease in grants of land. There is more space given to campaigns
in the latter part. This was not merely because of an interest in
military ambitions but also because campaigns, if successful,
were a source of revenue through the booty they brought and the
use of prisoners of war as labour. Territorial expansion meant
placing intermediaries in a hierarchy. The right of overlordship
is clear from the titles used, as for example in the inscriptions
commemorating these intermediaries.
The centrality of caste in the royal family was asserted, among
other ways, through matrimonial alliances. Women were the crux,
and this was recognized through the insistence on controlling
them, even if this was not publicly conceded. Women remained
the substratum, even where the manipulation of alliances often de-
pended on their placement in political chess. The extension of
caste into new areas was through the conversion of forest-dwellers
and pastoralists into peasants. The clan was a relatively vertical,
narrow society drawing on kin relations. Caste was more horizont-
ally structured, with multiple identities which spread and made
connections across a wide area. Grants of land to brāhmaṇas
either introduced caste into a new area or else reiterated it where
it already existed. The expansion of trade saw artisan groups also
being given jāti identities.
The ideological validation of the state as it matured drew on
Vaiṣṇava acculturation as seen in the Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa temple that
adjoined the royal palace. The acculturation is visually reflected
in architecture and icons. The link with the past was important
for creating a new identity in the region by bringing together a
variety of groups. The obvious way was to give them all a shared
history. So although the history is of the elite it can also resonate
with the others.
The Chamba Vaṃśāvalī 643
5. The Narrative from Inscriptions
The narrative on the rulers thins out in the latter part but there
is a large amount of evidence from inscriptions. Some were the
inscriptions of the rāṇās, the feudatories. Another category of
inscriptions with a different purpose is what have been called the
“fountain stone inscriptions”.16 These are attempts to catch streams
of water and pass them through an opening in a stone slab which
is placed at right angles to the flow of the water; it is engraved
and sometimes decorated with low-relief sculpture. The fountain
inscriptions are largely those of sāmantas and members of the
elite, some of whom are brāhmaṇas, and reference is often made
to the ruling king. They date from the eleventh to the thirteenth
centuries and the dates are generally precise. Some carry short
genealogies, almost in imitation of the royal praśastis (eulogies).
The inscriptions frequently state that the fountain stones were erect-
ed to provide merit for one’s parents and sansāra­bhaya­bhitaira­
varuṇna­devaḥ­sthāpitaḥ (to ensure freedom from rebirth).17 The
quality of the Sanskrit varies from poor to reasonable.
The fountain stones may have been attempts at controlling
water channels, crucial to the distribution of water in the hills, con -
current with the need for irrigation when cultivated areas expand-
ed. Their association in popular tradition was with the Nāgas. The
decoration and sculptured icons of deities tend to be more like folk
art, and different from even the early images at Brahmaur and its
neighbourhood. If these were attempts at recording the presence
of the rāṇās and families of that status, then clearly they were
neither extremely wealthy nor perhaps as highly sanskritized as
some feudatories in other kingdoms, particularly of the plains.
Some of these and other inscriptions may have been sources
for the vaṃśāvalī. The earliest royal inscriptions, written in indif-
ferent Sanskrit, cluster around Brahmaur. They are inscribed on
the pedestals of images and are associated with Meruvarman, as
stated in the vaṃśāvalī.18 In a couple of inscriptions he is described
16 J.Ph. Vogel, Antiquities of Chamba State, vol. I, 209–46.
17 Bharara Fountain Inscription, in J.Ph. Vogel, Antiquities of Chamba State,
vol. I, 237; Siya Dudhar Fountain Inscription, in ibid., 242.
18 Ibid., 136ff.
644 The Past Before Us
as belonging to the Ādityavaṃśa, which would be a synonym for
Sūryavaṃśa, and to the moṣūṇa­gotra. This pre-dates the story
about Mūṣaṇavarman. These are all brief records, suggesting that
Sanskritic culture was being initiated. The genealogies are short,
with no fancy linguistic frills, possibly again suggesting a relative
newness to political power. Some inscriptions are of the local feu-
da tories—the rāṇās, the rājanakas, and the mahaśrisāmantas.
Clearly, Meruvarman was rising on the backs of the sāmantas.
Another larger category was the grants of land and villages,
generally to brāhmaṇas, and more frequently recorded on copper-
plates. In a copper-plate inscription Yugākāra describes himself as
dvija­guru­bhakta­paramabhaṭṭāraka­mahārājādhirāja­parame­
śvara, leaving no doubt about his status.19 The language remains
incorrect inspite of the grant being conveyed by an akṣapaṭalika,
inscribed by the kāyastha Jasa and signed by the king. Migrations
from the plains of kāyasthas and brāhmaṇas had begun.
Two inscriptions from the reign of Somavarman, who claims to
be a son of Sāhilavarman, suggest that Yugākāra may have had to
contend with rival claimants for the throne,20 also suggested in the
story of the ten sons and the icon. Somavarman is not mention -
ed in the vaṃśāvalī, yet one of his inscriptions is issued from
Campaka jointly with Āsaṭa, who in the vaṃśāvalī is five genera-
tions down from Yugākāra, probably an attempt to extend the
genealogy or to deliberately omit Somavarman. He is described in
the inscription as belonging to the Mūṣaṇavaṃśa. Specific mention
is made of his being an upholder of the four varṇas, deva­dvija­
guru­puja . . . paripālit­cāturvarṇya­vyavastha . . . a clear signal
that the idea of caste stratification was familiar. This statement
becomes a standard formula.
The eulogy on Sāhilavarman echoes the Harṣacarita in saying
that he was a rain cloud extinguishing the fire of the Kīras and that
he impaired the fame of Paraśurāma. He is also described as at-
tacking the Turuṣkas, which may well have been hyperbole since
the Turks were still distant from the Chamba valley—unless the
reference is to Turkish mercenaries employed in neighbouring
kingdoms.
19 Brahmor Copper Plate Inscription, in ibid., 159ff.
20 Kulait and Chamba Copper Plates, in ibid., 182ff., 187ff.
The Chamba Vaṃśāvalī 645
The king grants seventeen acres of land in areas previously
occupied by what appear to have been feudatories, to a brāhmaṇa.
The grant is made on the same terms and conditions as of the pre-
vious occupancy relating to extent of pasture lands, fallow lands,
orchards, gardens, resting places and rights to enter and leave.
Earlier records were consulted. The assertion of the king’s right
over the land would point to a substantial change in his relations
with rājās and rāṇās and that he was sufficiently confident of his
authority to make such a grant.
Another inscription endorses a large network of administration
with a long list of officials and others concerned with the grant,
referred to as constituting the eighteen prakṛtis (elements) of the
state. It is unclear whether such a large body of officials was actu-
ally involved or present at court when the grant was made, or for
that matter whether this list was imitating a convention borrowed
from the style of land grant inscriptions from elsewhere—a style
which might have been introduced by knowledgeable brāhmaṇas
migrating from the plains to the hill states, since it was they who
were the recipients of the grants. The designations are familiar
from inscriptions outside Chamba and, as has been pointed out,
it is unlikely that there would have been an officer in charge of a
camel corps and an elephant wing of the army in such terrain.
An inscription from the reign of Āsaṭa issued from Campaka
carries much the same information, except that there is a change
of occupancy. A reference to the record-keeper—the kāyastha who
wrote it—and the king from whom the grant was received.21 It
would seem from these inscriptions that the king was claiming
ownership over certain lands, which would have been a depar-
ture from the previous system, most likely associated with clan
ownership. Possibly, these lands were previously allotted by the
king to functionaries, perhaps on a temporary basis, and now were
reallotted permanently to brāhmaṇas. The original occupants may
well have continued to pay the revenue and the dues to the grantee
rather than to the king. Thus, what were being transferred were
the rights of the king over these lands to the grantees. The gradual
process by which the elements of the state come to be established
and recognized is a change more evident from the inscriptions
21 Thundhu Copper Plate Inscription, in ibid., 197ff.
646 The Past Before Us
than from the chronicle. This recognition appears to have taken
place during the reign of Sāhilavarman and the vaṃśāvalī reflects
it in another idiom.
Salavāhana, a name referred to in an inscription, is missing in
the vaṃśāvalī. Clearly, the author of the vaṃśāvalī is indulging in
some editing, and for obvious reasons. The Vikramāṅkadevacarita
and the Rājataraṅgiṇī mention the king of Kashmir defeating
Sala vāhana of Campa and installing another king in his place.22
Kalhaṇa says Āsaṭa visited Kashmir in about 1088, together with
seven other chiefs of the western Himalaya.23 He was recognized
as superior to the others and is not referred to as a sāmanta. His
sister being married into the Kashmir royal family, was an event
registering a step up for the royal house of Chamba. She was to
be the mother of the infamous Harṣa of Kashmir. As kinsmen, the
royal house of Chamba assisted Harṣa against his enemies, and
also used the confusion to incorporate the neighbouring areas of
Curah and Pangi into the state of Chamba.
There is a profusion of land grants from the fourteenth century,
when it seems that the kingdom of Chamba was well established.24
The inscriptions, however, suggest a hesitant sanskritization of
language. Most inscriptions intermingle terms in Sanskrit with the
local language Chambiyali, the latter being referred to as bhāṣā in
the epigraphs. This doubtless made it easier for local functionaries
to follow the orders of the grant.
One inscription of the fifteenth century is clearly spurious since
it claims to be early but uses a number of Persian terms which do
not enter the Chamba vocabulary until late in the sixteenth century.
The script also changes from western Gupta brāhmī to Kashmiri
śāradā, to ṭākari, and eventually to nāgari.
6. The Literati
Some mention is made of kāyasthas, but they are not as prominent
as in Kashmir. Some paṇḍitas who are writers of grants have a
poor knowledge of Sanskrit, which could only occasionally have
22 Vikramāṅkadeva­carita, 18.38; Rājataraṅgiṇī, 7.218.
23 Rājataraṅgiṇī, 7.588.
24 B.Ch. Chhabra, Antiquities of Chamba State, vol. II.
The Chamba Vaṃśāvalī 647
been the fault of the engraver. Local recruits to the brāhmaṇa
varṇa may not have had the required training in Sanskrit, although
the quality improves over time. The designation of paṇḍita seems
to have been used for brāhmaṇa functionaries at the court. The
distinction between the migrant brāhmaṇa who came from well-
established agrahāras, and those who were locally inducted into
brahmanhood, is perhaps indicated by their names. Thus, among
the early grants there are some made to Manikaśarman of the
Kaśyapa gotra or to Bhīmaśarman. As a contrast there are grants
made, for example, to Badu Legha and to Cipu, son of Rāsi son
of Jin, said to be of the Bharadvāja gotra.
The term badu was the Chambiyali for brāhmaṇa. In a slightly
later inscription a grant is made to two brāhmaṇas, Gaṅgādhara
and Gayadhara, who are said to be the sons of Legha.25 Perhaps
this was a deliberate Sanskritization by the sons of Badu Legha.
A grant by Pratāpasiṃhavarman in 1575 to Rāmapatiśarman of
the Bharadvāja gotra was made as gurudakṣiṇā (a fee for the teach-
er), since Rāmapati was then rājaguru.26 A paṇḍita, Rāmapati is
mentioned as the writer of another grant of this time, so perhaps it
was the rājaguru himself, except that once again his knowledge of
Sanskrit is poor. The rājaguru connection goes further, in that the
Chamba plate recording the first donation remained in the family
of paṇḍita Mohan Lal, the rājaguru of Chamba in recent times.
Interestingly, a copy of this grant was also found, doubtless in-
tended for the royal record-office.
Pratāpasiṃhavarman made a grant of rent free land whilst on
pilgrimage at Haridvāra and this was recorded at Chamba. The
recipient was Badu Ratana, the son of Badu Amno and grand-
son of Badu Gayadhara. An inscription of about 1481 describes
Gayadhara as the son of Legha and the grandson of Sarmi and an
inscription of about 1522 refers to Badu Amno. We have therefore
a descent list of this family of badus. Being recipients of land in
virtually each generation, the inheritance had to be maintained
as a historical record. Inscriptional data also refers to the family
25 Saṅgrāmavarman’s Grant to Badhu Legha, in B.Ch. Chhabra, Antiquities
of Chamba State, vol. II, 34; Chamba Plate of Anandavarman, in ibid., 41.
26 Chamba Plate of Pratāpasiṃhavarman, in B.Ch. Chhabra, Antiquities of
Chamba State, vol. II, 57ff.
648 The Past Before Us
of the rājaguru Rāmapatiśarman/paṇḍita Rāmapati as coming
from Gauḍa and being well endowed with grants.27 They are not
referred to as badus, and they use their proper Sanskrit names.
The largest number of grants was made by Bālabhadravarman,
whose known dates are 1589–1642. Evidently he succeeded his
grandfather when quite young. His penchant for making grants is
reflected in the vaṃśāvalī, which refers to him, somewhat cryp-
tically as a veritable Balikarṇa, presumably a reference to the
mythical rulers Bali and Karṇa remembered for their phenomenal
generosity.
That the historical tradition of a state was largely confined to the
events of that state seems to explain why there is so little interest
in events in other parts of northern India. The Mughals, after de-
feating Rajputs, Turks, and Afghans, had established their power,
and even Kashmir had had Turuṣka rulers and had now become
the summer resort of the imperial Mughals. Their proximity is
mentioned only in passing. The imprint is apparent from the use of
the occasional term which comes from the new administration. A
grant to the Lakṣmī Nārāyaṇa temple is recorded in the presence
of the koṭvāla bahādara, a Persian designation which was used
in Chamba in 1592.28
Differentiation between the brāhmaṇas from Gauḍa and the
local brāhmaṇas may have had to do with a differentiation in
function, possibly leading to some tension. From this period on
it is possible to spot the local brāhmaṇa when his āla or clan is
named.29 Most of these grants were written by Rāmapati, but
gradually others are mentioned and then his son Lakṣmīkānt
takes over the work. Apart from Gauḍa there is also mention of
another grantee who was a Drāviḍa brāhmaṇa from the south.
Presumably, he too would have found his way to a Himalayan state
via the performance of rites at a place of pilgrimage. This degree
of mobility would also have allowed stories of royal origin to be
borrowed.
27 Ibid., 75ff.
28 Lakṣmī Nārāyaṇa Temple Plate, in ibid., 83.
29 Lakṣmī Nārāyaṇa Temple Plate of Bālabhadra, in ibid., 120; Chamba Plate
of Bālabhadra, in ibid., 121. One is reminded of the construction of the name
Pañcāla in the Mahābhārata.
The Chamba Vaṃśāvalī 649
The number of grants became dramatically small after the reign
of Bālabhadravarman. His son Janārdana was involved for twelve
years in campaigns against Nurpur and was eventually killed. Had
Bālabhadravarman exhausted the revenue from good arable land
by his extensive grants to brāhmaṇas? Insistence on royal titles
did not hide the reduced circumstances of the Chamba rājās.
The three categories of inscriptions point to distinct historical
changes. Inscriptions on image pedestals are largely the records
of lesser rulers and intermediaries in the initial period of contact
with mainstream culture. The fountain inscriptions record the
continuing presence of intermediaries and their interests. The tone
changes with the grants, and once these are established and linked
to the founding of the Mūṣaka dynasty there seem to be virtually
no other inscriptions. This would suggest that, inspite of being a
small state, the ruling family of Chamba kept a firm control over
its feudatories, or at any rate that is the impression it wished to
convey through the inscriptions. It would seem that the rājagurus
and the family purohitas made sure that the grants came their way
and appear to have been largely dependent on the royal family for
their lands, of which they had a substantial amount.
The records of events and decisions are fairly full. They provide
evidence of a changing history and a consciousness of a historical
past. The records from Chamba carry an air of informality, doubt-
less deriving from it not being a powerful state. Relationships
were more casual and informal than in Kashmir or Gujarat. The
evidence of the vaṃśāvalī coincides at some points with that of the
inscriptions; at other places it differs. The chronicle, when it came
to the establishing of the Chamba state, seems to have taken as its
source the statements in the official records. It became therefore
the official history of Chamba.
The compiling of the text in the seventeenth century was not
accidental. The kingdom was well established. It had connections
with other states in the hills and plains. But there were also areas
with which there were hostilities and it was necessary to show
strength as well as a long and dominant presence in the area. The
vaṃśāvalī and the inscriptions ensured this presence. The insis-
tence on continuity is such that the age-old hostility against Nurpur
is given more space than that against the Yavanas. There is a quiet
acceptance of the Yavanas and the adaption to their ways.
650 The Past Before Us
Both the Rājataraṅgiṇī and the Chamba vaṃśāvalī are not al-
to gether free of inaccuracies. The methods we use today to check
these inaccuracies were not available to the authors. What is of
interest is the explanation that can be given for accuracy and
inaccuracy.
The addition of siṃha to the name, imitating Rajput usage,
marks a change. This is often explained as expressing a wish to
be associated with the Rajputs in opposing the Mughals. It could
equally well be an attempt to enhance their own status by associ-
ating with Rajputs who had matrimonial alliances with Mughal
royalty, and thereby formed an exclusive community. Chamba’s
hostility towards Nurpur may have also been fuelled by the wish
to oust other competitors, since Nurpur had good relations with
the Mughals.
The central points in the narrative are the initial settlement and
the link to the descent groups of the kṣatriyas; the relocation of the
core of the state, the succession of kings as members of dynasties,
the king’s claim to status and to being above the feudatories by
granting land to brāhmaṇas to construct a support structure, by
using deities for validation, and by converting a relatively egali-
tarian society into a society stratified by caste inequality. Unlike
the Rājataraṅgiṇī, the Chamba chronicle makes no comment on
these changes. The multiple articulations of local culture resisting
a preferred uniformity can perhaps be seen in the provincializing
of Puranic Hinduism.
Chronicles, as I have tried to show, may not be based on a
modern type of critical enquiry; nevertheless they reflect a con-
sciousness of history. This takes the form of narrating perceptions
of the past in a manner that observes the conventions of existing
historical traditions, in this case the Puranic tradition. The nar-
rative is sequential. It also attempts to explain events. It is an
approximation, therefore, of historical writing.
17
The Prabandha-cintāmaṇi
1. Constituents of the Jaina
Historical Tradition
An alternative tradition in the writing of chronicles, differ-
ent from the Rājataraṅgiṇī or the Chamba vaṃśāvalī,
was that of the Jaina prabandhas (chronicles), of which
the Prabandha-cintāmaṇi, written by Merutuṅga at the start of the
fourteenth century, is one.1 Merutuṅga is not of the same intellec-
tual calibre as his predecessor Hemacandra, but his Prabandha-
cintāmaṇi is all the same a fine example of the Jaina historical
tradition. This genre becomes important in the late first and early
second millennium ad with the writing of a number of biographies
and chronicles pertaining to kings as well as to Elders of the Jaina
Saṅgha. It has similarities with the alternative history of the Budd-
hist traditions. J.G. Buhler and H. Jacobi, working on Buddhist and
Jaina texts, disagreed long back with the notion that there was an
absence of historical writing in India, citing Buddhist and Jaina
chronicles as examples of such writing. Although primarily in the
form of a literary text, the Prabandha-cintāmaṇi recorded social
and dynastic history.
Among the categories of texts constituting the Jaina histori-
cal tradition, the foremost were the prabandhas (chronicles) and
the caritas (biographies). The Dvyāśraya-kāvya of Hemacandra,
1 Merutuṅga, Prabandha-cintāmaṇi; Prabandha-cintāmaṇi of Merutuṅga
Ācārya (The Wishing-stone of Narratives), trans. C.H. Tawney.
652 The Past Before Us
dating to the twelfth century, with a substantial historical cont ent,
narrated in part the history of Gujarat under the Caulukya kings,
although its primary function was as a grammar. Merutuṅga, writ-
ing later, could expand on this. The history was continued further
in other texts treated as sequels, such as Rājaśekhara’s Prabandha-
kośa, written in 1349 to update the narrative of the Prabandha-
cintāmaṇi of 1306.
The caritas, sometimes also referred to as the Purāṇas but dis -
similar to the brahmanical Purāṇas, were biographies of great men.
The pre-eminent text was the many-volumed Triṣaṣṭiśalākāpuruṣa-
carita, composed by Hemacandra in the twelfth century. These
were biographies of sixty-three important persons, some of whom
were heroes of olden times, often mythological; and some were
the better-known historical rulers.
There were also biographies of individual rulers, among which
was Hemacandra’s Dvyāśraya-kāvya, the Hammīramahākāvya
of Nayacandrasūri, and the Vastupāla-Tejaḥpāla praśasti of
Jayasiṁha. Caritas and prabandhas are sectarian writings meant
to edify an audience, but historical situations lie at their core.
The seat of authority in the Saṅgha was known as the paṭṭa,
hence the importance of the paṭṭāvalīs, guruvāvalīs, and sthavirā-
valīs providing the succession lists of the Elders, where āvalī was a
lineage. These claimed to be a continuous succession from the time
of Mahāvīra and were larger in number among the Śvetāmbara
Jainas. There is a gradual shift from succession lists to the his-
tory of the institution. Since the manuscripts were repeatedly
copied in the monasteries, their colophons provided evidence of
this activity.
Many texts had colophons giving essential information about
the author and the text. But the Jaina texts are somewhat unique
in the length of their colophons and the range of information they
provide; the name and background of the author and of the patron,
the ruling king, the associated officers, the name of the copier,
the date of the text, and whatever else seemed appropriate. The
information was necessary as a record of who wanted the text
copied and for what pious act. To some degree, the colophons
are comparable to the praśastis in the copper-plate grants. Given
the extraordinary literary activity in Jaina communities, these
The Prabandha-cintāmaṇi 653
colophons are like brief summaries of the historical context of
the book.
The other category of text common to virtually every part of
the subcontinent was of course the epigraph. Inscriptions of this
period of the history of Gujarat are found as usual on stone slabs,
pillars, copper-plate charters, and on the pedestals of images,
largely Jaina. Their contents are contemporary records, but among
the more important ones there are references to dynastic history.
There is a fair degree of corroboration between epigraphs and
texts. They are issued as usual by kings, ministers, and sāmantas
of various categories.
Secular texts—such as grammars, lexicons, works on logic,
and mathematics, astronomy, and medicine as well as manuals
of administration—all contributed to lively intellectual activity.
Later writers referred back to earlier ones in their discussions.
The language gradually changed from Ardha-Māgadhi and Prākrit
to Sanskrit.
2. The Background to the Texts
There are many similarities in the Buddhist and Jaina traditions.
Both grow out of the need to record the teachings and activities of
historical figures, Mahāvīra and the Buddha. Mahāvīra is dated to
approximately the sixth-fifth centuries bc, just prior to the Buddha.
The generally accepted date for the death of Mahāvīra is 527 bc,
although this date too, as that of the Buddha, has been re-exam-
ined in recent years and subjected to a range of fifty or so years.
Nevertheless, within the Jaina chronological tradition there is by
and large an adherence to a single date. Mahāvīra taught in the
same geographical area as the Buddha—the middle Ganges plain.
The Jaina tradition therefore focused on what it viewed as the
history of the spread and establishment of his teaching, his biog-
raphies being written in later centuries.2
As with the Buddhist tradition, there was a questioning of
2 For a general survey of Jaina teaching and texts, see P.S. Jaini, The Jaina
Path of Purification; P. Dundas, The Jains; S. Stevenson, The Heart of Jainism;
J.P. Jain, The Jain Sources of the History of Ancient India.
654 The Past Before Us
brahmanical beliefs such as those related to the Vedic deities.
Deities have little or no place in early Jaina texts, nor the efficacy
of Vedic rituals, the power of the divine being unacceptable. There
was also a difference in defining the social ethic. Observing the
varṇāśramadharma, with its caste-bound duties and obligations
was not central to the ethic, since it was argued that the social
ethic was universally applicable and involved the behaviour of
one human being towards another irrespective of caste and sect.
A distinction was maintained in Jaina thought between the ethic
for the lay follower and that for the renunciate. The former was
in some ways less rigorous and made some concession to local
custom.
The Jaina historical tradition also had a distinctive gloss which
tended to contradict or at least differ from the narrative in the
brahmanical tradition. Jaina authors maintained that they were
writing to dispel the untruths of other, primarily brahmanical,
versions.3 Two of the major brahmanical Purāṇas are hostile to the
Jainas and predict that there will be some kings who will patronize
the pāṣaṇḍas (false heterodox sects), and that people will attack
brāhmaṇas and their rituals.4 It is said that Viṣṇu created a man
with deluded ideas (mahāmoha) to teach false doctrines, and those
who converted to the heterodox sects were rākṣasas.
The early Jaina corpus is associated with centres linked to the
region of Mathura. Among the texts are the Kalpasūtra and the
Ācāraṅgasūtra, which include biographical references to Mahāvīra.
He came from a gaṇa-saṅgha background and belonged to a clan
which was part of a confederacy of clans based in Vaiśāli. Clan
societies were in conflict with emerging kingship in Magadha, a
conflict referred to in other texts as well. Nevertheless, the kings
are claimed as patrons of the new ideologies and kinship links sug -
gested.5 Such connections may well have been an afterthought
since the texts date to a few centuries later than the events.
3 Paumacariyam, 2.117.
4 Bhāgavata Purāṇa, 5.6.9–11; Śiva Purāṇa, 2.5.4.1–24, quoted in P.S. Jaini,
“Jaina Purāṇas: A Puranic Counter-tradition”, in W. Doniger (ed.), Puranic
Perenesis, 207ff.
5 S. Ohira, A Study of the Bhagvatīsūtra: A Chronological Analysis; J.P. Jain,
The Jaina Sources of the History of Ancient India, 16ff.
The Prabandha-cintāmaṇi 655
Mahāvīra was familiar with the teachings of a number of sects
that took non-orthodox positions. In composing some of these
records an attempt was made to give them greater authenticity by
locating them at a particular historical place and time. As in the
case of the Buddhists, the first converts to his teaching are said
to be brāhmaṇas, which may have provided the necessary status
for the teaching.
Similar to the Buddhist tradition, the impetus to a historical
perspective was given by the nature of the society from which
Jainism grew. This required a list of teachers and statements on the
teaching, some of which were part of the Canon. With the spread
of the teaching came variants in observation and practice, resulting
in dissident groups and schisms and diverse viewpoints. There was
a need to sort out the disparities or recognize the differences and
this took the form of a number of Councils. The Canon was first
put together at Pāṭaliputra, recording the teachings and history to
that point. These were reconstituted, or reiterated if need be, at
Mathura in about the fourth century ad, and yet again a couple of
centuries later at Valabhī in western India. By now the split into
the two major schools—the Śvetāmbaras (white-clad monks) and
Digambaras (sky-clad, i.e. naked monks)—was established.
The differences between the two sects were reiterated whenever
the opportunity arose, especially when Jainism became prominent
in some areas in the later first millennium ad. Jainas from Mathura
tended to move to western India when patronage in northern India
declined. A record of these changes was thought necessary even if
each group maintained its own, not always in agreement with the
other. In a sense, such records were the precursors of the praban -
dhas (chronicles) written by Jaina authors in later times, often
bearing on the secular activities of rulers though not devoid of
religious content.
The assertion of the Jaina perspective on early texts from the
brahmanical tradition took the form, for example, of new versions
of the Rāmāyaṇa and Mahābhārata. In the case of the former, this
was the Paumacariyam of Vimalasūri; and of the latter, Jinasena’s
Harivaṃśa-purāṇa. Among the texts incorporating historical tradi-
tions were the caritas, prabandhas, and paṭṭāvalīs. These recorded
the succession of the Elders of the Order but also dated the reigns
656 The Past Before Us
of kings, occasionally including members of merchant families
where they were patrons. Collectively, this provides both narrative
and chronology, recalling passages from the Buddhist Theravāda
tradition. Similar information was included in the colophons to
these texts. The focus was naturally on personalities and events
connected with the Jaina religion.
By the early second millennium ad in Gujarat, the influence of
Jaina personalities was largely due to their being statesmen, minis -
ters, generals, and wealthy merchants. Their political connections
and dominant position in society required that their activities
be recorded, even if the record was ostensibly concerned with
religious activities. A fair amount can be read between the lines.
Fortunately, we also have inscriptions issued by kings referred to
in the chronicles, or in their reign, and these act as corroborative
records.
In the turn to history, some persons from the past recur often.
Śreṇika, also known as Bimbisāra of Magadha, becomes a histori-
cal marker in Jaina texts and the claim to authenticity is some-
times made by stating that the narration of events in a parti cu lar
text took place in the presence of, or was told to, Śreṇika. The
Mauryas receive attention, the claim being that the founder of the
dynasty, Candragupta Maurya, became a Jaina towards the end of
his life—as supposedly did his great-grandson, Samprati. Aśoka
from the same family having been appropriated by the Buddhists,
the Jainas may have thought of claiming the patronage of the
other two, who were treated as major Jaina patrons.6 This appro-
priation reflects the historical time when there was considerable
interest in Sramanic teaching. The choice of Candragupta almost
inevitably brought his brāhmaṇa minister Cāṇakya/Kauṭilya into
the picture, since by all accounts the young king was the protégé
of the brāhmaṇa.
Historical writing was not restricted to royal activities. When
monasteries became powerful institutions, as they did with the
patronage of kings and merchants, the succession of monks
holding office had to be recorded. This “lineage” of monastic El-
ders took the form of lists of succession. Where the monk was
6 E.g. Bhadrabāhu cāṇakya candragupta kathānaka evam rājā kalkivarṇan.
The Prabandha-cintāmaṇi 657
important, there was a biography as well.7 Jaina monks performed
rituals for their lay supporters and also recorded events relating
to those important in the community.8
The need to maintain records also arose from the broader ideo -
logical background of those sects and communities that were
opposed to brahmanical views, of which there were quite a few.
The opposition took various forms: the denial of deity and sacri-
ficial rites; the non-acceptance of an immortal soul, ātman, and
its rebirth, different from the continuity of consciousness or the
self; and a refusal to concede that society was governed by im-
mutable rules deriving from divine sanction, such as those of
varṇāśramadharma.
The category of nāstikas, among which such groups were in-
cluded, ranged across a spectrum of non-orthodox thought, some
at one extreme in pursuing a life of hedonism, others insisting on
virtually altruistic social ethics. The concern with the centrality
of the human condition, and of the origin of the institutions of
society lying in human needs, was common to all such sects. This
tended to encourage turning to the past to understand the reason
for the existence of institutions and to view them as continuous
from previous time to now.
3. Some Notions about Earlier Times
The shape of the Jaina universe was like an hourglass, with
heaven located at the top, the earth in the middle, and many hells
below it. The earth was a circular island, at the centre of which
lay Jambudvīpa, surrounded by six concentric rings that were
also islands separated by oceans. In the middle of Jambudvīpa
was Mount Meru which, given its pivotal position, was inhabited
by gods. The area around it was divided by mountains into seven
continents, the southernmost being Bhāratavarṣa. This has moun-
tains as a boundary and the two rivers Sindhu and Gaṅgā flow
through it. The janapadas within the area is where the civilized
live, whilst the barbarians inhabit the peripheries. Distances are
7 P. Granoff, “Religious Biography and Clan History among Śvetāmbara
Jains in Northern India”, 195–211.
8 The system prevails to this day among Hindu pāṇḍā priests.
658 The Past Before Us
vast and virtually immeasurable, although they are said to be
measured by ropes (as was also the case in the administration of
cultivated land for purposes of assessing tax).
The time cycle is a perpetually slow-turning wheel divided
into six segments. The upward movement of the wheel is towards
happiness and the downward is the reverse. Humans were born in
pairs in remote antiquity and the continuity of society was through
their procreation, an idea somewhat parallel to that of sibling
incest in Buddhist origin myths. The initial extremely long life
of humans decreases over time. The number of wish-fulfilling
trees also declines dramatically, which then leads to the need for
humans to labour. The tīrthaṅkaras, literally the ford-makers,
come to teach the doctrine, although they come after long inter-
vals,9 suggesting the larger spans of cyclic time. This is a con-
trast to the firmly linear shorter time-frame time of the Jaina
chronicles.
Historical concerns begin with discussions on what there was
in the remote past and how different it was. The history of the
universe begins with Ṛṣabha, who pronounced the earliest teach-
ing. All mankind was a single caste—manuṣyajātirekaiva—and
divisions arose because of livelihood and conflict. Ṛṣabha, seeing
the disorder in society, decided to discipline it by instituting occu-
pational groups which were given the names of castes—kṣatriya,
vaiśya and śūdra.10 His son was Bharata, known for propagating
non-violence.11 He created the brāhmaṇas, who initially lived up
to Jaina ideals and kept away from violence. Currently, brāhmaṇas
who sacrificed animals were apostates.12 This was viewed as radi-
cal thinking, similar to that of the Buddhists; therefore the Jaina
śramaṇas are also treated with contempt in brahmanical texts.
Setting eyes on a Jaina monk was regarded as an ill omen!
Some of the names claimed as historical are common to other
traditions as well. Apart from the initial twenty-four tīrthaṅkaras,
two heroes from the epic tradition, Rāma and Kṛṣṇa, were popular
9 J. Cort, “Genesis of Jaina History”, 469–506.
10 Jinasena, Ādipurāṇa, 16.179.
11 Ibid., 38.8–32.
12 Jinasena, Ādipurāṇa, 38.45, quoted in P.S. Jaini, The Jaina Path of Puri-
fication, 288.
The Prabandha-cintāmaṇi 659
and their stories are often retold. Perhaps Vaiṣṇava Bhagavatism
was a competitor and therefore there was an attempt to present
a Jaina perspective on the two epics, projected as true to what
actually happened. These two heroes were part of the sixty-three
śalākāpuruṣas (persons of renown), some of whom were known
and others imagined, whose hagiographies were recorded. These
became seminal to some of the biographies of rulers in the early
second millennium ad.
Ultimately, the list of tīrthaṅkaras comes to Mahāvīra, who is
clearly historical. The associating of teachers with royalty, which
was frequent in this tradition, makes him a contemporary of king
Śreṇika. The biography of Mahāvīra was written in later centu-
ries, often together with the other tīrthaṅkaras who were teachers
of the doctrine. Mahāvīra was sometimes given a kinship link to
Bimbisāra, comparable to the attempt to link the Mauryas to the
Śākyas. By the mid-first millennium the narratives had a larger
component of the historical, as in the Kālakācārya Kathānaka and
the Vasudevahiṇḍi. Dynasties of the Śakas, Śuṅgas, Guptas, and
Pratihāras were referred to. Hemacandra, for instance, sought to
correlate the succession of kings with that of Elders. Where the
paṭṭāvalīs pertained to religious authority, the rājāvalīs listed secu-
lar authority. The ninth-century Ādipurāṇa of Jinasena attempted
a reformulation of the Jaina tradition, probably urged by his being
the religious preceptor of the Rāṣṭrakūṭa king Amoghavarṣa I.
The names of the Elders and of important monks of the various
sects and institutions—the senas, saṅghas, and gacchas—and the
correct succession to office are recorded and where possible cor-
related with reigning kings, which was chronologically useful.
The hagiographies of teachers may have encouraged the idea
of biographies of rulers. A number of contemporary rulers are
mentioned in connection with the narratives, including Bhoja
Paramāra of Mālava against whom the Caulukyas campaigned,
Jayacanda of Varanasi and Kanauj, Pṛthvīrāja Cāhamāna/Cauhāna,
the Candella ruler Parmardideva, and in passing Lakṣmaṇasena
of Gauḍa and Hammīra.
Discussions on kingship touched on perceptions of the past.
The Ādipurāṇa maintains that kingship was not imposed on human
society by the gods, although there is some uncertainty about the
660 The Past Before Us
authority of the human king in terms of what he controls. He too
is ideally subject to the Jaina ethic.13 Superiority, however, lies
in renunciation and the path of the monk. There is less emphasis
on military campaigns, even for purposes of protection, although
campaigns were not disbanded. Protection could also be ensured
by accumulating wealth in order to distribute it in dāna (charitable
gift-giving). The exemplar would probably have been Aśoka from
the Northern Buddhist tradition. Protection is also required from
the brāhmaṇas who delude people and whose wealth should be
taxed. This reverses what is said about śramaṇas in the brahmani-
cal Purāṇas. The centrality of ahiṃsā as a primary commitment
in the social ethic distinguishes the Śramaṇa religions from Brah-
manism, even if the practice of politics did not necessarily lead
to an abjuring of violence by army commanders who were some-
times Jainas.
The Nītivyākāmṛta of Somadevasūri, a Digambara Jaina monk
from the South, also discusses attitudes towards kingship.14 The
text initially invokes not a deity but his guru. As advice to princes,
he was following the Arthaśāstra of Kauṭilya, although his Jaina
commitment to rationalism and logic as necessary to kingship is
apparent.15 He distanced himself from the more materialist Lokāyata-
Cārvāka view which he thought was too close to hedonism, and as
such not close enough to morality.16 Somadeva expresses admira-
tion for Kauṭilya, who enabled Candragupta Maurya to establish
a state for the welfare of all. Possibly this example was chosen
because by now Candragupta was said to have become a Jaina.
The ethos of Kauṭilya would hardly have been appropriate for a
good Jaina monk.17
Ahiṃsā allowed the smooth working of society presumably be-
cause it disallowed violence as a solution to conflict. Somadeva
saw society as having moved historically from rāṣṭra to deśa to
viṣaya to janapada, from a society drawing wealth from agro-
pastoral activities to increasing this wealth by other economies.18
13 Chapter 42.
14 Somadevasūri, Nītivyākāmṛta.
15 5.49–56.
16 5.33, 1.41.
17 10.4.
18 19.1–4.
The Prabandha-cintāmaṇi 661
Among these he mentions the extensive use of metal, the high
production of goods, the organization of guilds, accumulated
wealth, and the maintenance of irrigation. The authority to rule
involves ensuring that there were no caste preferences before the
law and all subjects were protected. Protection from the powerful
and the establishment of a just authority requires the existence of
the state.
The state was for him of considerable importance, ensuring
the co-existence of all beings and the punishment for criminals.
He argues that ignorance is the worst possible condition and that
knowledge is primary in all public matters. In case of disputes the
king is the arbiter and can refer a matter to the sabhā (a coun -
cil). If accused, a king has also to submit to judgement.19 He
doubts the veracity of the king being a deity, as stated in some
brahmanical texts. Following Kauṭilya he refers to the six expe-
dients of the state, which in his list are wars, treaties, invasions,
surrender, apathy, and duplicity. To kill an unarmed fallen foe
was the equivalent of killing a brāhmaṇa.20 This was an unlikely
comparison coming from a Jaina, but perhaps by now the analogy
had become shorthand for the worst conceivable act. Kingship is
a matter of ruling ethically for when the strong devour the weak
anarchy sets in. It is better to have a foolish king than to not have
one—an opinion Kauṭilya would not have endorsed. Brāhmaṇas,
kṣatriyas, and kinsmen should never be given a place of authority
as they all misappropriate state funds.21
4. The Jaina Tradition in Gujarat
Merutuṅga’s work on the Caulukyas (or Solaṅkis, as they are also
called) draws on the immense scholarship of the earlier Jaina
scholar, Hemacandra, who wrote in the twelfth century and was
widely quoted. His scholarship was phenomenal, bringing together
various strands of grammatical and philosophical thinking as well
as the Jaina historical tradition. In what is seen as a tour de force,
the Dvyāśraya-kāvya, a work on grammatical forms, incorporated
in the Prākrit section a biography of the contemporary king,
19 27.1–38.
20 28.15, 28.37–44, 30.88, 112.
21 5.53, 9.8, 1.3, 18.21.
662 The Past Before Us
Kumārapāla, and similarly in the Sanskrit section a brief survey
of the Caulukya dynasty to which the king belonged.22
The chronology in this section is generally correct. There are
many vignettes on the persons who ruled and their association
with others. References to Caulukya campaigns and victories are
selective and defeats are passed over. Bhīma, who may have fled
when Mahmud of Ghazni desecrated the temple at Somanātha,
is not mentioned, but it is said that Bhīma pursued Mahmud on a
later occasion. However, opposition to the kingdom is recorded—
from the forest-dwellers labelled jointly as Bhillas, from lower-
caste groups such as Ābhīras and Jāṅgalas, as well as from the
mleccha here spoken of as the Turuṣka/Turks, Yavanas, Śakas
and Hūṇas.
The more massive work of Hemacandra was the Triṣaṣṭiśalākā-
puruṣa, the narratives on sixty-three great men, and its appendix,
the Pariśiṣṭaparvan, also known as the Sthavirāvalī.23 This, ac-
cording to some, was written for the edification of his royal patron
Kumārapāla, a king who was the subject of many works from
Jaina authors since they held that he was gradually converted to
Jainism by Hemacandra, who was his minister.24
Hemacandra, who inspired Merutuṅga, was born in Kathiawar
to a vania, a merchant caste of Jainas, in 1088 and was brought
up from childhood by a Jaina monk, which ensured his access to
scholarship.25 He lived mainly in Aṇahilapāṭana, the capital of
the Caulukya kingdom, and his first royal patron was the ruler
Jayasiṁha Siddharāja. He continued to be active into the reign
of the successor king, Kumārapāla, whom he is said to have con-
verted to Jainism. Hemacandra died in 1173, whilst Kumārapāla
was reigning.
The Triṣaṣṭiśalākāpuruṣa-carita encompasses a perspective that
seems to sweep in popular stories about people from the past. The
22 Hemacandra’s Dvyāśraya-mahākāvyam.
23 Triṣaṣṭiśalākāpuruṣacarita.
24 Jayasiṁha, Kumārapāla-bhupāla-carita, Jinamandana, Kumārapāla-
prabandha, Śrisomatilakasūri, Kumārapāla-deva-caritam, Somaprabhācārya,
Kumārapāla-prabandha-pratibodha, all of a slightly later period. Jinavijayamuni,
Kumārapāla-caritra-saṁgraha, vol. 41, is a collation of some texts.
25 G. Buhler, Life of the Jaina Monk Hemacandra.
The Prabandha-cintāmaṇi 663
sixty-three biographies are made up of the following categories
of persons, important to Jainism:
24 tīrthaṅkaras, ford-makers, or teachers
12 cakravartins, great men, who rule vast territories
9 vāsudevas, who are righteous and opposed to the following
9 prati-vāsudevas, whom they are destined to destroy
9 baladevas, non-violent laymen
When a person is labelled as one among these, the characteristics
of the narrative are almost predictable. Curiously, both Baladeva
and Vāsudeva are personal names of members of the Vṛṣṇi clan
and involved in the events narrated in the Jaina Harivaṃśa,
which includes Jaina versions of some of the stories in the Mahā-
bhārata.
The text inevitably draws upon the tradition of Jaina Elders
from the past but also takes in characters from the epics. Starting
with the story of Ṛṣabha, it moves on to the heroes of the brah-
manical Purāṇas, such as Bharata and Sagara of the Lunar lineage,
interleaving them with stories of Jaina tīrthaṅkaras. Echoing the
Mahābhārata, the life of Kṛṣṇa is narrated with a focus on his
enmity with Jarāsandha, the ruler of Magadha. This is given far
greater prominence than the story of the Pāṇḍavas. Kṛṣṇa is of
course not an avatāra of Viṣṇu in this version, and descriptions are
given of his rather worldly interests culminating in his death. The
choice of Rāma and Kṛṣṇa was obviously because of the widely
known epics. But it may also have been that, because they had been
deified in the later redaction of the epics and become the literature
of Bhagavatism, the Jaina versions were a response questioning
this conversion. Jainas believed that the brāhmaṇas had falsified
the narratives and were therefore kuśāstra-vādins, as stated in the
Paumacariyam.26 The epic stories precede the biography of Mahā-
vīra, suggesting that they may have been thought to have occurr -
ed prior to the rise of Magadha at the time of Śreṇika. Many other
lives are narrated in the text.
From the perspective of Jaina historical traditions the more
precise text of a concise history is the Sthavirāvalī-carita or
26 P.S. Jaini, “Mahābhārata Motifs in the Jaina Padma Purāṇa”, 108–15.
664 The Past Before Us
the Pariśiṣṭaparvan of Hemacandra, the appendix to the Triṣaṣṭi-
śalākāpuruṣa.27 It draws from a variety of Jaina sources, such
as Vasudevahiṇḍi in Prākrit, the narratives of the Kathānaka and
other literature, as well as from commentaries on earlier writing
referred to variously as sūtras, cūrṇis, niruktas, and ṭīkās. The
primary themes are the biography of Mahāvīra, the history of
the kings of Magadha in the main, and of Jaina munis and the
Jaina Saṅgha.
The status of Mahāvīra is established through his upper-caste
birth, the marginal intervention of deities at this event, and the
first converts being brāhmaṇas. Both Buddhist and Jaina tradi-
tions use Magadha as their initial context, and this links the new
teachings to the emergence of kingship. The narrative of Nanda
rule continuing to the Mauryas is given in some detail, as also
Cāṇakya organizing the usurpation of the Nanda throne by Candra-
gupta. This was also the period of the spread of the Śramaṇa
religions. The sending of Jaina missions is linked to the reign of
Samprati, the grandson of Aśoka, and suggests parallels with the
Buddhist missions said to have been sent by Aśoka. The central
date is that of the death of Mahāvīra, taken as the equivalent of
527 bc, but the narratives are said to be later, dating from the time of
Bhadrabāhu, which is given as 170 years after Mahāvīra. Candra-
gupta is said to have renounced the throne and travelled to South
India with Bhadrabāhu, the Jaina teacher. This date would be half
a century earlier than the date for Candragupta calculated on the
basis of other sources. The text concludes with the period prior to
that of the Caulukyas.
The Pariśiṣṭaparvan has narratives about various early rulers of
Magadha, doubtless to reinforce the date of Mahāvīra. These are
the sections referred to as Pāṭaliputra-parvan, Nandarājyalābha,
Cāṇakya Candragupta-kathā, Aśokaśrikunāla-kathā and Samprati-
rājā-carita. 28 The narratives reflect the perceptions of the polity of
Magadha of early times as envisaged in twelfth-century Gujarat.
27 Sthavirāvalī/Pariśiṣṭaparvan of Hemachandra; R.C. Fynes (trans.), The
Lives of the Jaina Elders; Bhadrabāhu cāṇakya candragupta kathānaka evam
rājā kalkivarṇan; P. Granoff (ed.), The Clever Adulteress and Other Stories: A
Treasury of Jaina Literature, 189–207.
28 6.231–52, 8.1–10, 194–469, 9.14–54, 11.23–127.
The Prabandha-cintāmaṇi 665
Śreṇika is described as visiting Mahāvīra to hear his teaching (as he
did with the Buddha in the Buddhist tradition) and this was doubt -
less intended to give added stature to Mahāvīra. There is also a
historical continuity of events. Whereas Śreṇika is associated with
the earlier capital of Rājagṛha, the Nanda king is linked to ruling
from the recently founded Pāṭaliputra, which was to become the
imperial capital of the Mauryas. Unlike other accounts of the city,
it is described here as a temple centre of the Jainas—despite their
having had no temples at that time. After seven Nanda rulers, the
brāhmaṇa Cāṇakya reversed their fortunes and the throne was
taken by his protégé Candragupta Maurya.
There are many stories of Cāṇakya’s tactics to ensure this, as in
Viśākhadatta’s Mudrārākṣasa.29 In the Jaina tradition Cāṇakya is
said to be a Jaina, but because he is a brāhmaṇa he is unscrupul-
ous in his actions—a Jaina view of the brāhmaṇas. The villain-
ous brāhmaṇa is not a surprising image, given that Jainism arose
partially in opposition to brahmanical thinking. The curious story
about the birth of the next Mauryan ruler, Bindusāra, was part of
a play on his name, but the story about Aśoka and his son Kunāla
seems to have been borrowed from the Northern Buddhist tra-
ditions. Samprati, who is not claimed by the Buddhists, is here
described as a patron of the Jainas, and is also responsible for
dispatching Jaina missions to South India.
That the Buddhists and the Jainas selected and allotted to them-
selves the Mauryan rulers would suggest that the Mauryas did
patronize the heterodox sects rather than the brāhmaṇas. They
are prominent in the writings of the heterodox authors, whereas
their names are barely mentioned in brahmanical texts—another
indication of ideological concerns influencing the perception of
the past.
The early history of Magadha was important in both Jaina and
Buddhist traditions, this being the area and the approximate period
of their original teachings and first propagation. It was after its
history in Magadha that Jaina teaching was organized canonically
and spread to Mathura, western India, and the South. It recalls a
time when Buddhist and Jaina sects had political patronage, and
29 See chapter 8.
666 The Past Before Us
to that extent it was their “golden age”. Magadha was projected
as an early utopia. Heterodoxy lay in describing the Vedas as un -
true and the ritual of sacrifice as false posturing, based on the
slaughtering of animals.30 There is an attempt to look historically
at the reasons for the emergence of heterodoxy, but not neces-
sarily in any depth.
Narratives are basic to explaining the teaching and often popu-
lar stories are reformulated to suit the ethics of Jainism as in the
story of Rāma taken from Vālmīki’s Rāmāyaṇa and changed ac-
cording to Jaina ideas. Sermons and dogma become less direct
when interwoven with stories. The ambience in these stories is
often that of merchant society, substantial patrons of the Jaina
Saṅgha.
5. Merutuṅga’s Prabandha-cintāmaṇi:
Sources and Audience
The Prabandha-cintāmaṇi by Merutuṅga, written in 1306, is a
history of Gujarat narrating the reigns of kings of the Cāvaḍā and
Caulukya dynasties in the main, ending with the Vaghelas, and
with marginal references to other associated dynasties such as the
Pratihāras, Candellas, and Parmāras. It focuses on the previous
five centuries but is aware of earlier histories. To that extent it
is a chronicle of the region. Written from a Jaina ideological
pers pective, its intention differs from the Rājataraṅgiṇī and the
Chamba vaṃśāvalī.
Merutuṅga’s scholarship is not of the same high quality as Hema -
candra’s. Nevertheless, he obviously took the trouble to consult
widely in putting together his account of the dynasties that ruled
in Gujarat, focusing on the Caulukyas. He says many have written
on the same subject and expressed diverse views; he has selected
what appeared to him as the most likely past. This suggests a
range of sources and an awareness of inconsistencies. He is more
centrally concerned with providing dynastic history, although not
altogether shorn of some added events and emphases.31
30 4.19–35.
31 A.K. Majumdar, Caulukyas of Gujarat, provides a survey of this history.
The Prabandha-cintāmaṇi 667
Sources that he is likely to have consulted on the Cāvaḍās, for
instance, would have included the bardic version of the dynastic
histories, the Ratnamālā of Kṛṣṇakavi composed in the thirteenth
century,32 and for others Someśvara’s Kīrtikaumudi. The chrono-
logy of dynastic history incorporated a series of stories in each
reign, pertinent to kingship and to the Jaina social ethic. History,
therefore, is also an illustration of good kingship and the supe-
riority of Jaina teaching. Hemacandra is evoked, particularly
in what was believed to be his great achievement—converting
Kumārapāla. Such a major conversion would be a prime subject
for history.
Merutuṅga’s sources would therefore have been earlier Jaina
texts of a historical nature. Particularly important for reconstruct-
ing chronology was the availability of colophons from a variety of
texts from the eleventh century, with their invaluable information.
For example, the titles given to kings could be indications of their
power as perceived from local usage, or the visualization of the
author. Thus in the earlier books Jayasiṁha is referred to merely
as ruling, whereas later colophons give him elaborate royal titles.33
Merutuṅga states that he was assisted by Guṇacandra, who wrote
the first manuscript copy of the Prabandha-cintāmaṇi.
As in most kingdoms, inscriptions were a valuable source of in-
formation and defined a particular format of court record, such
as the praśasti, which observed a historical pattern in differen-
tiating between the present and the past. These could be used as
sources for historical statements should the authors choose. If the
inscriptions are read seriatim, they provide an outline of dynastic
events.
This is also reflected in the format of the text which is some-
what different from most chronicles. The narratives are smaller
individual prabandhas named after the main person of the story
and arranged chronologically. These are then strung together
in chronological order, and the succession of rulers and their
32 G.C. Choudhury, Political History of Northern India from Jaina Sources,
c. 650 ad to 1300 ad, 200–307. A.K. Forbes, when writing the history of Gujarat
which he called the Rāsmālā, depended heavily on these bardic sources.
33 G.C. Choudhury, Political History of Northern India from Jaina Sources,
48–9.
668 The Past Before Us
activities read as a single text. Many prabandhas begin with the
phrase kadācit (once upon a time). Predictions in the course of a
story sometimes act as introductions to a theme and provide a play
on time where a future refers back to the past. The Sanskrit of the
narratives is relatively simple, with less of an overlay of literary
embellishments common to many authors at the time.
Merutuṅga was a Jaina of high standing and moved in court
circles. The audience for his writing was both members of the
court and the Jaina community outside the court. His wish to reach
out to the wider audience in celebrating Jaina achievements of
the time might account for the more accessible language, which
makes it rather different from the Rājataraṅgiṇī.
The chronicle would have been read by courtiers of more
than one generation, wishing to be acquainted with the history
of Gujarat, perhaps to draw lessons from the past. It would also
have been read by monks, who would then deliver sermons to
lay followers and others that were interested, on the great events
and personalities of the past linking their lives to the Jaina ethic.
These narratives are about many kings, but those that were partial
to Jainism are specially commented upon and their actions treated
as exemplary. In this second capacity the text would be transmitted
both by reading and oral renderings.
6. The Narrative
The Prabandha-cintāmaṇi gives more importance to the Caulukya
dynasty, which coincided with the high point of activity by Jainas
in various offices of governance, and was linked to patronage. This
history is therefore informed and detailed, even if accompanied
by a fair amount of story-telling.
A list of Caulukya kings is provided: Mūlarāja I; Cāmuṇḍarāja;
Vallabharāja followed by his brother; Durlabharāja; Bhīmadeva,
who was the nephew of another brother; Karṇa; Jayasiṁha Siddha-
rāja; Kumārapāla, a nephew of Jayasiṁha and great-grandson of
the brother of Karṇa; Ajayapāla; Mūlarāja II; Bhīma II; Tribhu-
vanapāla; Arjuna; Saraṅgadeva; Karṇa. Regnal years are given
for the Cāvaḍās and the Caulukyas, and are dated in the Vikrama
saṃvat.
The Prabandha-cintāmaṇi 669
The focus is on the two leading rulers of consequence, Jayasiṁha
Siddharāja and Kumārapāla. The rulers up to Kumārapāla are the
same as in the Vadnagar praśasti inscription issued during the reign
of Kumārapāla.34 The praśasti was composed by Nāgara brāh -
maṇas aspiring to high status. In this they were successful, which
may in part account for the praśasti.
Caulukya rule begins in approximately ad 996, when the Cāva-
ḍās were replaced. In the thirteenth century, during the reign of
Bhīma II, c. 1178–1239, the Vaghela chief was helping Bhīma II
retain his position, indicating that the decline had begun. Soon the
Vaghelas became the effective rulers. In 1299 Ulugh Khan annexed
Gujarat and the axis of power began to shift in the direction of
what was eventually to emerge as the Sultanate of Gujarat. This
was when Merutuṅga was researching and writing the Prabandha-
cintāmaṇi. The kingdom of Gujarat was most often in conflict
with the Paramāras to its east, the Cāhamānas/Cauhānas of Nadol
to the north, the rulers of Konkan to its south, and those referred
to as the mlecchas—most likely the Arabs, Turks, and Afghans set-
tling in north-western India.
Since this text is not closely tied to the itihāsa-purāṇa tradi-
tion, the history it narrates is somewhat different. There is less on
origin myths, although these are not altogether excluded. There is
also little on claiming ancestry with ancient lineages and descent
groups of the early Puranic and epic heroes. It moves fairly quickly
into narratives of kings and dynasties. Why this is so could in part
be explained by the difference between Jaina ideas of the past and
those of the brahmanical tradition, and perhaps partly because
the Jaina tradition drew on a patronage not confined to the royal
court but extended to include urban and merchant communities.
Inevitably, it would have had a wider audience.
The text begins with an invocation not of any deity, but of
Ṛṣabha and later of Mahāvīra. The opening passage is a simple
statement naming the author and those who helped him write the
book, which he speaks of as being as pleasing as the Mahābhārata,
its concerns being the life and activities of persons of recent times.
It would seem that he sees the epic as a series of biographies which
34 Ep. Ind., 1, 293.
670 The Past Before Us
would be feasible up to a point. He then narrates the stories of
Vikramāditya and Sālivāhana, thus appropriating, but in a limited
way, ancient heroes for the start of his chronicle, his choice being
determined by his claim that they both became Jainas.
The historical narrative is initiated by the statement on the
founding of the city of Aṇahilvād/Aṇahilapāṭana in the equivalent
of ad 746, although another source dates it to 765. This is asso-
ciated with Vanarāja, a local adventurer who rebelled against and
killed the revenue collector sent from Kanauj, possibly an official
of the Pratihāra administration. Such an event seems to have been
common enough at that time. There is a passing suggestion of his
having links with the Haihaya clan of the Yadus, associated some-
times with western Indian dynasties.35 He established himself as
an independent ruler founding the Cāpotkaṭa dynasty, also known
as Cāvaḍā. There follows a list of rulers each with specific regnal
years and with dates in the Vikrama era—an attempt at chrono-
logical precision.
According to the chronicle, the last member of the dynasty
was assassinated by his sister’s son, who then began to rule as
Mūlarāja I and founded the dynasty of the Caulukyas in ad 941.
The relationship may have been coincidental, but in communities
observing cross-cousin marriage (if these were such communi-
ties), the sister’s son would be acceptable as the successor in the
absence of a son. The origin myth describes the Caulukyas as be-
longing to the Somavaṃśa, the Lunar lineage. Their name is said
to derive from the culuka (cupped hands) of Brahmā, from which
the hero arose, and is similar to the myth of the Cālukyas of the
Deccan. Possibly there were some lineage links that cut across
these families of the western region. Some have read culuka to
mean a jar rather than cupped hands, which would make them born
out of a jar. This would link them further afield with many jar-
born heroes and dynastic families, not least the Kauravas of the
Mahābhārata. There seems to have been a need for these claims,
perhaps in competition with those of other families in western
India. Variants of the name come in other sources, including
Solaṅki, but gradually Caulukya became standard.
35 G.C. Choudhury, Political History of Northern India from Jaina Sources,
202.
The Prabandha-cintāmaṇi 671
Mūlarāja seems to have battled on all fronts against the rulers
of Mālava, Saurashtra, and Kaccha. The capital remained at
Aṇahilapāṭana as it did for the duration of the dynasty. He is
remembered here as having exempted the tax on peasants when
there was a drought, but to have collected the share in later years
when the harvest was good. The categories of intermediaries and
the range of administrative positions are more clearly differenti-
ated in the inscriptional references than in the Chronicle. Locally
important people were not only the landed elite and the upper
bureaucracy, for included in this category were wealthy bankers
and merchants associated with the former and with the court.36
The regnal years assigned by Merutuṅga to the Caulukya kings
are generally reasonable. Once again, collateral lines weave through
the succession. Three short-term rulers follow, until the nephew of
the third rules as Bhīma I in ad 1022 and reigns until 1064. Cam-
paigns against the Paramāras of Malava and of lesser places, the
Cāhamānas of Nadol, and the Ābhīra-raṇaka, are almost perennial,
with mention also being made of campaigns against Sindh.
In referring to campaigns, curiously neither Hemacandra nor
Merutuṅga make any particular mention of Mahmud of Ghazni’s
raid on the temple at Somanātha. Perhaps it was not worth men-
tioning, however much it was exaggerated in Turkish and Persian
chronicles. Yet the Caulukyas were Śaiva kings and Somanātha
was an important temple. Some less important Jaina sources make
a casual reference to places plundered by the Turks, and Soma-
nātha is included in the list.
Bhīma’s successor Karṇa is associated with attacks on the Bhillas,
the forest tribes of western India, who would have been at the
receiving end of aggression from a state encroaching into forest
areas. Encroachment involved clearing the forest to obtain cul-
tivable land, which when settled by peasants would enhance the
state revenue. During the reign of his successor the Bhillas are said
to have blocked the road and had to be removed by force, suggest-
ing hostility between them. Karṇa built a temple in Bhilla country,
doubtless to control the area and help in its acculturation.
A marriage alliance with the daughter of the king of Konkan
36 V.M. Jha, “Feudal Elements in the Caulukya State: An Attempt at Reloca-
tion”, in D.N. Jha (ed.), The Feudal Order, 211–48.
672 The Past Before Us
(south along the west coast) probably extended trading networks.
Karṇa was a patron of the poet Bilhaṇa during the latter’s sojourn
in Gujarat, where the king’s romances were the subject of his
poems.37
Karṇa was succeeded by one of the two celebrities of the dynasty,
Jayasiṁha Siddharāja (1094–1144). There was much court in-
trigue before his coronation since he was of a collateral line. There
is an interesting reference to various tax remissions and to the
Queen-Mother abolishing the pilgrim tax at Somanātha, which
had brought in a sizeable income of 72 lakhs.38 It was clearly
economically viable for a state to encourage a temple to become a
place of pilgrimage, and no doubt some of the income would have
been diverted to private hands. The king began an era, the Siṁha
samvat, and used it in a few inscriptions, but it did not become
the regular era and remained a claim to status.
Merutuṅga reports on the debate held at the court between the
Digambaras and Śvetāmbaras presided over by Siddharāja. The
Śvetāmbara monk Śrideva is described as “a lion to controversial
elephants”. He wins the debate and is granted twelve villages by
the king. The arguments were recorded by a court officer. The
debate was about how food is to be eaten by monks, the wearing
of clothes, and whether women can be liberated from rebirth. The
more liberal Śvetāmbara position was upheld and the Digambaras
were ousted. This echoes the holding of the Buddhist Councils
to clarify doctrine and the role of Aśoka in the calling of one of
these in the Buddhist tradition. Hemacandra assembled the rep-
resentatives of the sects and also persuaded the Queen-Mother
to support the Śvetāmbara.39 A reference such as this to the past
was important to the authority of the Śvetāmbara sect in Gujarat.
This then allowed it later to spearhead the defence of the Jaina
religion against the Śaivas.
Merutuṅga then describes how Hemacandra, the grammarian,
scholar, and literary figure at the court, was invited to write a gram-
matical work for the king. This was the Dvyāśraya-kāvya, or the
37 See chapter 13.
38 3.93ff.
39 3.156.
The Prabandha-cintāmaṇi 673
Siddhahemacandra. The praśasti of the patron included a brief
history of the dynasty to date, listing conquests and succession.
The king was goaded into arranging for this in competition with
his enemy, king Bhoja of Mālava, who is said to have authored a
book on etymology. This was literally a war over words. Gram-
matical works were sent for from Kashmir for consultation, since
literary activity at this time was at a height in the northern king-
dom. There was a need for proclaiming the quality of literary and
grammatical works, particularly as it would seem that the rival
court of Bhoja prided itself on such achievements. It is said that
three hundred copyists were employed and copies sent to various
places. The linguistic facility of Hemacandra is constantly ap-
plauded. Like Agastya who drank up the ocean, Hemacandra drank
up the ocean of language.40 The brāhmaṇas when speaking about
the past quote the Purāṇas; so Jaina historical traditions provide
this other perspective.
Many anecdotes punctuate the history of kings. They often
focus on merchants whose activities were respected in the so-
ciety of Jainas.41 Merchants generated wealth and this may in
part explain the unusual emphasis given by Hemacandra and
Merutuṅga to the restoration of dilapidated temples, said to be a
merit-producing activity. These were not temples that had been
desecrated: they had fallen into disrepair. This is a significant
statement, because it was a period when some temples were
desecrated by rulers, both local and Turkish. The narratives are
interspersed with descriptions of local geography and references
to constructing tanks and other good works. Aṇahilapāṭana was a
wealthy city boasting of Jaina scholars and well-read brāhmaṇas.
The text refers to discussions on a variety of subjects.
Then comes the reign of the celebrated Kumārapāla (1144–74).
He is also mentioned in Persian historical writing of a later period.
Merutuṅga could draw upon several general works, although
many biographies came to be written later.42 He seems to have
40 Prabandha-cintāmaṇi of Merutuṅga Ācārya, 129.
41 3.110–11.
42 Among these was Jayasiṃhasūri’s Kumārapāla-carita. Jinavijayamuni,
Kumārapāla-caritra-saṁgraha, vol. 41.
674 The Past Before Us
consulted the inscriptions issued during Kumārapāla’s reign, since
some information is the same in both.
Kumārapāla was a nephew of Siddharāja and was kept away
from the throne not only because he was from a collateral line, al-
though Siddharāja had no son, but perhaps because he was the
great-grandson of a courtesan.43 Siddharāja disapproved of him
as a successor but the ministers, including Hemacandra, supported
and protected him. Hemacandra therefore continued to receive
favours when Kumārapāla became king in his middle age.
Merutuṅga refers to the various campaigns of Kumārapāla with
details of who led them and anecdotes associated with them. The
campaign against Mallikārjuna of the Konkan is made much of. He
does not explain why, but doubtless it had to do with controlling
the ports along the western coast tying in with the Arab trade in
Gujarat. Kumārapāla is described as śrīrājya-cūḍamaṇi, the crest-
jewel of the realm of the goddess Śrī/Good Fortune, which marks
a change of status and makes greater claims than those made by
previous rulers.44
Kumārapāla is also described as a Jaina arhat (enlightened one),
and the claim is made that he became a Jaina with Hemacandra as
his preceptor. The incident that is said to have clinched his con-
version is narrated at length. Hemacandra persuades Kumārapāla
to restore the temple to Śiva at Somanātha.45 This had fallen into
disrepair through lack of maintenance and weathering from sea
spray. After two years the renovated temple was ready and its
consecration ritual was performed by the Śaiva chief-priest Bhāva
Bṛhaspati, who is given hardly any prominence in this account.
Hemacandra accompanies the king and performs the rituals,
somewhat to the surprise of the court as he is a Jaina and not a
Śaiva. Kumārapāla takes him into the sanctum of the temple and
asks him to demonstrate the superiority of Jainism over Saivism.
Hemacandra requests the god Śiva to manifest himself and the god
obliges. Kumārapāla, quite overcome by this miracle, enquires of
the god the value of various teachings and Śiva pronounces that
what Hemacandra teaches is the best. The converted king takes the
43 4.126.
44 Vadnagar Prasasti, Ep. Ind., 1, 296, v. 14.
45 R. Thapar, Somanatha: The Many Voices of History, 113ff.
The Prabandha-cintāmaṇi 675
vow of abstinence from flesh and alcohol, forbids animal slaughter
in temples for fourteen years, and builds Jaina temples.46
Merutuṅga’s version has a strong political motif. The religious
opposition of the Śaivas and Jainas to each other included com-
petition for royal patronage. It is unlikely that Śiva would have
approved of Jaina teaching being superior to all others. There
was disagreement among Jainas and Śaivas about the religion of
Kumārapāla. Given that there had been opposition to his becoming
king, it is possible that he courted the heretics as a way of keep-
ing control over the Śaiva factions at court. At another level the
story is also a putting down of Śiva, a deity for whom the Jainas
had hardly any devotion. The brahmanical Dharmāraṇya
Mahātmya makes light of this event by describing Kumārapāla
as a pākhaṇḍa Jaina (a false Jaina) who ascended the throne with
the help of Hemacandra.47
Bhāva Bṛhaspati, in a long inscription, claims that it was he who
persuaded the king to renovate the temple, and makes no men-
tion of Hemacandra.48 Interestingly the inscription issued by the
Nāgara brāhmaṇas in ad 1151 has no hint of Kumārapāla being
a patron of any other religious sect but the Śaiva. This is contra-
dicted by another inscription of ad 1184, where the Jaina temple
is stated to have been built by mahārājādhirāja śrī Kumārapāla
after his being enlightened as a Jaina by his preceptor Hemasūri.49
This would suggest that he may have become a Jaina in the latter
part of his reign but also that the narrative of Hemacandra was
well known in Jaina circles.
The description dates to a century and a half after the event,
with a changed historical context and some decline in patronage
to Jainism. Is this an attempt to suggest that there can be an elision
from Śaiva to Jaina belief? Acclaim from the deity of the rival was
the best form of acquiring presence. This was also the threshold
time of the coming of Islam, and the Jainas had to work out their
equation with the new religion. The virtual invisibility of Islam in
these records is in itself a comment on how it was viewed.
46 4.140ff.; Prabandha-cintāmaṇi of Merutuṅga Ācārya, 126–30.
47 J.E. Cort, “Who is King?” 96.
48 R. Thapar, Somanatha: The Many Voices of History, 81ff., 113ff.
49 Jalor Stone Inscription of Samarasiṃhadeva, Samvat 1242, Ep. Ind., 11,
54ff.
676 The Past Before Us
The narratives of Kumārapāla’s conversion to Jainism and his
enthusiasm parallel once again the stories of Aśoka’s conversion
to Buddhism and his patronage under the guidance of Upagupta,
as described in Buddhist texts. They also evoke what might have
been thought to be Candragupta’s relationship to his precep-
tor, Bhadrabāhu. Kumārapāla is said to have built 14,140 Jaina
temples, which echoes the statement about the 84,000 stūpas con-
structed by Aśoka. Hemacandra is said to have written his major
works at the request of Kumārapāla, and in part to enlighten him.
Possibly, Merutuṅga was aware of the representation of Aśoka in
the Aśokāvadāna of the Northern Buddhist tradition. Hemacandra
died at 84, having desired it to be so. Is this a way of saying that he
observed the rite of sallekhanā, the Jaina method of a controlled
fast leading to death? Mahāvīra is said to have foretold the reign
of Kumārapāla and his conversion to Jainism. This can only be
taken as the author’s attempt to provide the ultimate unquestionable
endorsement for a Jaina readership and community.
That the court was not as dominated by Jainism as Merutuṅga
suggests is apparent from inscriptional evidence. A major epigraph
of Kumārapāla composed by the court poet Śripāla in ad 1151,
praises the Nāgara brāhmaṇas.50 It was copied and added to in
ad 1632 by yet another Nāgara brāhmaṇa long after the Caulukyas
had ceased to rule.
Kumārapāla was succeeded by his nephew Ajayapāla, the des-
cent again moving to a collateral line (1173–6). He destroyed the
temples of the previous rulers (pūrvaja prāsādān), and dismissed
or had killed those who had worked for Kumārapāla.51 As an
ardent Śaiva he is depicted as hostile to the Jainas, a hostility per-
haps again rooted in a faction fight at the time of his succession. He
was involved in the usual campaigns against the Cāhamānas and
the Guhilas. Aggressive relations with Mālava continued even into
the next reign, despite his having to defend the kingdom against
the mlecchas. There is no comment on the latter as a significant
enemy, the traditional enemies still being around.52 Ajayapāla was
murdered; the succession therefore went to his minor son, whose
50 Vadnagar Prasasti, Ep. Ind., 1, 293.
51 4.175.
52 4.179ff.
The Prabandha-cintāmaṇi 677
mother took on the Turkish armies and defeated them. This is also
mentioned in some Turkish chronicles.
In the declining years of the Caulukya dynasty the kingdom was
torn by sāmantas feuding amongst themselves and others in revolt
against the king. Centre-stage is now taken by the two brothers
Vastupāla and Tejaḥpāla, who became ministers and eventually
virtually ruled the kingdom. Coming from a family of high office,
their fortunes accumulated and they made substantial donations
towards building temples and institutions. This is visible in the
finest Jaina temples of the time being built through their patronage.
Merutuṅga wrote a prabandha on their activities.
An interesting episode relates to the perception of the new
political power, the Turks, referred to as mlecchas. The guru of
the mlecchas is an Islamic scholar, an ālima, who was leaving for
Mecca from a port in Gujarat. Some advised the king to capture
him en route, but Tejaḥpāla advised to the contrary. This safe con-
duct led to amity between Tejaḥpāla and the Suratrāna/Sultan.53
The presence of the Turk at this point does not mark any particular
disjuncture in this area.
Merutuṅga gives no explanation for Caulukya decline. It is once
again the sāmantas, raṇakas, and maṇḍalikas competing for power
that are foremost in political events. The successful one, Arṇorāja,
had been made a sāmanta by Kumārapāla and given the village
of Vyāghrapalli, which provided the name of the subsequent
dynasty—Vaghela. There was a marginal kinship connection with
Kumārapāla. Associated with them was the upper bureaucracy,
and it is not surprising that ministers become the virtual rulers
in periods of decline. The king’s dependence on the two brothers
continued. This is reflected even in texts that provide examples
of how to draft administrative documents.54
The Chronicle briefly moves away from Gujarat and there
are anecdotes about kings and peoples from neighbouring areas,
such as Pṛthvīrāja the Cāhamāna holding back the mleccha. Some
fanciful stories are told about earlier scholars such as Varahami-
hira, Bhartṛhari, and Nāgarjuna. There is further mention of the
contestation between the Śvetāmbara and Digambara sects, and
53 4.191.
54 Lekhapaddhati.
678 The Past Before Us
between the Śvetāmbaras and what remained of the Buddhists in
the area.55
7. The Jaina Chronicle
The three chronicles, discussed in this and the two previous chap-
ters, differ in many ways. The Rājataraṅgiṇī is an intellectually
sophisticated narrative describing the evolution of the kingdom
of Kashmir. Kalhaṇa is particular about stating his sources and
assessing their reliability. His span of interests includes threats
from neighbours, the politics of feudatories, fashions at the court,
hydraulic engineering, and fiscal problems that led to the oppres-
sion of peasants and to the plundering of temples by kings and their
officers. Its historical perspective is undeniable and was recognized
a couple of centuries ago. The Chamba vaṃśāvalī is the history of
a small kingdom, the narrative just about rising above minimal
information. An interesting aspect is the transition from deriving
legitimacy from local Siddhas and Nātha yogīs to the mainstream
Bhāgavata sect, demarcating sources of legitimacy from a local
tradition to one with a much wider reach. The Prabandha-cintā-
maṇi of Merutuṅga, a text of the Sramanic tradition, shows a
clear sense of the historical, but with a Jaina ideological focus. The
conv ersion of the king Kumārapāla to Jainism by his minister, Hema-
candra, is therefore highlighted, but in the context of an account
of three dynasties that ruled in Gujarat.
Merutuṅga’s text was read as a source by later Jaina authors.
Their writings were either a continuation of the chronicle or,
more often, took the form of biographies of prominent rulers and
Jaina monks and Elders. Jaina chronicles parallel in many ways
the Rājataraṅgiṇī with its focus on the politics of the court and
its factions. The factions are represented as either sympathetic or
hostile to Jainism. There is less said on the political interventions
of the intermediaries.
The chronicle inevitably concerns itself with the concept of the
state and the king’s relationship with society. The seven cons-
tituents of the state are repeated as defined in the Arthaśāstra of
Kauṭilya. Familiarity with the itihāsa-purāṇa tradition is required
55 5.201–18.
The Prabandha-cintāmaṇi 679
of any author who is writing about the past and this familiarity is
demonstrated in Merutuṅga’s chronicle. But there is more to it than
just this tradition which is subordinated to the alternative Sramanic
tradition. There is also the association of the cakravartin which
by now was common to all traditions but interpreted differently.
The Buddhist and the Jaina concept is subtle and more complex
involving both the ethics of law and governance as well, with less
emphasis on military conquest as in the brahmanical tradition.
This is up to a point ironic since kings partial to Jainism fought
battles, and respected Jainas were included among the better-
known military commanders.
Within the Jaina tradition asceticism even temporarily is often a
prelude to kingship as a source of strength. The incidence of kings
renouncing the throne may have been influenced by this ethic,
although in more practical terms it may have been forced on such
kings by their successors. An ideal king was to be powerful in con-
quest, extending protection to all, creating wealth, and combining
this with being the patron of Jainism and its ethic.56 The aspiration
to conquest in some ways reverses the commitment to ahiṃsā but
presumably if it benefits the religion it is acceptable.
Rivalry between Jainas and Śaivas becomes apparent from the
Prabandha-cintāmaṇi. The two reigns that symbolize the power
and prosperity of the Caulukyas—those of Jayasiṁha Siddharāja
and Kumārapāla—are the ones in which royal patronage was ex-
tended to both religions. Was the patronage due entirely to the
religious inclinations of the two kings, as the Chronicle would
have it, or did the politics behind the patronage wish to draw on
the wealth of the Jaina community? Kings were a source of pa-
tronage even if the recipients were from diverse and competing
sects. Kings therefore had to defend dharma, even when its defini -
tion varied, as between the Jainas and the Saivas. The continuity
of administrators may have eased the contentions. The political
aspect of patronage is implicit in the support that it brought to
the king. Patronage to the Jainas implied good relations with the
wealthy commercial community and Kumārapāla’s reign coincides
with a high point in commerce.
56 Triṣaṣṭiśalākāpuruṣacarita, 6.309.
680 The Past Before Us
Jainism did not endorse deities controlling human action hence
divinity in the concept of kingship would be distant.57 But on
occasion the deity could be introduced to emphasize a point as
in the story of Śiva endorsing the dharma of Hemacandra. The
ideal king was to model himself on the ideal layman observing
the Jaina ethic and not dependent on divine sanction. The ultimate
attainment lay in renunciation.
The Prabandha-cintāmaṇi is a sequential narrative and car-
ries the continuity of a history. It observes the chronologies of
the dynasties in linear fashion and relates them to the era of the
Vikrama saṃvat. This was a prevalent era and probably more
easily followed than the one based on the death of Mahāvīra. The
narrative recalls major events associated with the reign of each
king. Apart from this, the ideological concern is to depict the Jaina
interest in the best possible way and to claim royalty as patrons.
This patronage was so special that even Śiva, the deity of one of
the competitors for patronage, approved of it. It is a narrative of
past times but comes up to the contemporary period.
A large number of Jaina sources and detailed data on the court
and associated interests came to be written about in these times,
and were presumably discussed by the literati. A study of these
post-fourteenth-century texts might illumine some of the reasons
given for events and decisions. It may be possible to categorize
authors on the basis of the explanations that they offer. Sources
can be contradictory about events. The Turkish sources speak of
Qutb-ud-din Aibek plundering Gujarat, but the Gujarat sources
are silent. Were they avoiding a reference to what was considered
an embarrassment, or were the Turkish chroniclers exaggerating
their claims? The Prabandha-cintāmaṇi was treated as reliable by
chroniclers of the Sultanate and by later scholars such as Abu’l
Fazl in Mughal times, who cite and even occasionally quote its
representation of the past of Gujarat. This introduces another
dimension into the historiography of the period and could be a
source of insightful comparative study.
57 J.E. Cort, “Who is King?”, 85ff.
18
Therefore
Looking Back and Looking Forward
1. Locating History
The purpose of this book has been not just to ascertain
whether or not there was a sense of history in early India.
More than that, it has been to search for the forms this
might have taken, and how it might have been defined. My concern
has been with how authors from the early past saw the past before
them.1 I have tried to refine what is meant by a sense of history in
the context of early societies and locate its articulation in varied
Indian texts from early India, at various times during the period
c. 1000 bc to c. ad 1300.
In doing this I was not attempting to broaden the current
defi nition of history in order to accommodate forms of writing
prevalent in early India. Such forms existed in many societies of
the ancient world and have been seen as expressions of historical
consciousness. I have argued that what is included as history in the
present day is no longer limited to what it was in the nineteenth
century, and many more forms are now seen as being potentially
1 To argue that Indian historians of modern times have shown a sense of
history, and that too in conformity with how history is defined in modern
times, is irrelevant to the sense of history in early India. In discussing this, A.
Sharma, Hinduism and its Sense of History, does not differentiate between the
pre-modern and the modern.
682 The Past Before Us
or actually historical. In relation to pre-modern times, in particu-
lar, this has largely been an outcome of writing the history of
societies and cultures outside Europe, and of questioning some
of the generalizations about the pasts of the non-European world
made during the colonial period. The earlier definition of what
constitutes history evolved from a narrower focus of European un-
derstandings of its own past—within which the Judaeo-Christian
tradition provided a limited perspective, although this has been
considerably enlarged in recent times.
Two commanding debates in the last couple of centuries have
discussed evolution and its parallel, history, both as explanations
of the past. Initially, a narrative of events had sufficed as history,
but, when seen as a possible way of organizing knowledge, histori-
cal events had to be verified and causal explanations sought. A
teleological perspective strengthened its evolutionary direction.
The Enlightenment emphasized the notion of progress, and Marx
and Weber sought laws governing historical forms. Thereafter the
focus was on how and why there was historical change, which in
turn introduced the idea of legitimate methods of narrating the
historical past. History as we know it had arrived. But it is as
well to keep in mind that this was not what was understood by
“history” in earlier times. This book has been an attempt to view
history in such a time.
Even within European historiographical perspectives, there
has been a recognition of changes in what constitutes a historical
tradition. Greco-Roman narrative history gave way to the Christian
concern with seeing God’s will and the authority of the Church as
determining factors, followed by the more secular approaches of
the Enlightenment, which in turn have recently been questioned.
In reconstructing Islamic and Chinese historiography there was
little attempt, initially, to consider the worldview of the authors
of the texts apart from the information they provided. The shift
today from political history to social history has moved the nar-
rower definition of history—as the narration of events concerning
rulers—to the broader definition of history—as representing those
in authority alongside other segments of society. This shift draws
on a wider range of sources and assumes that, directly or indirectly,
these shaped, and were shaped by, social contours.
Therefore: Looking Back and Looking Forward 683
Mine is not an attempt to legitimize any or every claim to an
indigenous reading of Indian history. The status of history in a text
has now to meet the requirements of the discipline as it is practised
in current times: the evidence has to be checked for reliability, and
causality in explanation has to be based on logical analysis with as
objective a generalization as possible. Few pre-modern “histories”
meet these contemporary requirements. But that should not stop
us from investigating how authors of that world understood their
past, and, more importantly, why they understood it the way they
did. Whether we think their interpretation conformed to historicity
or not is a substantial but subsequent question.
I have therefore read ancient texts not primarily for the infor-
mation they provide on person and event—such readings being
already extensive in the modern writing of early Indian history. I
have instead also tried to read them from the specific focus of how
they understand past societies and the actions of persons believed
to have been historical: in sum, the past looking at its own past.
This is possible now that we have a new understanding of his-
torical change in early India arising from the research of the past
half century. I have argued for the possibility of seeing it, at one
level, as the change from the predominance of clan-based socie-
ties to that of kingdoms, where records with a historical potential
would differ from one to the other. The change in most situations
was a mutation rather than a disjuncture.
I have also suggested that this difference is partially linked to
an aspect of what I have called embedded history and externalized
history. The former is that which is presumed to be historical by
the authors and their audiences, and where the narrative is embed-
ded in ritual texts. This is followed by a gradual reduction in the
need to embed narratives in ritual texts, and to recording them in
new genres specifically recognized as pertaining to the past, as
well as recording the past as seen from the perspective of those
in authority. These new narratives articulate both the past and the
present as independent statements, released from having to be
embedded. Such texts constitute externalized history and date to
the post-Gupta period. This history assumes the demise of most
clan societies, which were replaced by kingdoms, requiring more
recognizably historical records. The authorship of these records
684 The Past Before Us
now lay with Buddhist and Jaina monks, scholarly brāhmaṇas,
kāyastha scribes, and the occasional bard.
I have also argued for three kinds of historical traditions—as
determined by the authors, by the audiences to whom they are ad-
dressed, and by the agenda of the text. The predominant tradition
was the itihāsa-purāṇa, attributed to brāhmaṇa authors writing
about those that ruled.2 A rather different, and in some ways more
realistic, perspective on the latter comes from the compositions
of the bards. Their early compositions are thought to have been
overwritten by brāhmaṇa authors, making it difficult to retrieve
the original, although it was not entirely obliterated. We have a
flavour of what some might have been from the bardic epics that
have survived in later times from the second millennium ad. A
counterpoint to this is the third tradition, the Sramanic, where
those that ruled are tied into the history of the teaching of the
Buddhist and Jaina Saṅghas, the central institution in each case.
Although some narratives drew on common sources, this cre-
ated a largely alternative reading to the itihāsa-purāṇa tradition.
These relationships, however, are more implicit than visible. The
Sramanic tradition emerged from a more urban context and con-
cerned itself with the evolution of the sect and its patrons. What
is put together as the past in the three traditions inevitably differs
from each other in various ways.
Given these differences, the meaning of “a sense of history”
cannot be reduced to a brief definition. The texts reflect grada-
tions in the perception of what might be historical. I have tried
to trace the gradual recognition of historical consciousness, and
its formulations as representations of the past, in a variety of
genres. These, it seems to me, reflect three phases: historical con-
sciousness, or showing an awareness of the difference between a
fantasized past and one that has elements of what was believed
to have actually happened; historical traditions, which are more
consciously constructed representations of the past and where
the purpose of the construction is evident; and historical writing,
2 J.L. Fitzgerald uses a felicitous phrase—“the genre of purāṇa (and its
crucial sibling itihāsa)”: see idem, “History and Primordium in Ancient In-
dian Historical Writing: Itihāsa and Purāṇa in the Mahābhārata and Beyond”
(forthcoming).
Therefore: Looking Back and Looking Forward 685
which claims to be a narrative of a person or an event backed by a
claim to historicity. An overview of the genres considered should
make these differentiations apparent.
2. The Genres—I
The seminal genre, as in many literatures of the ancient world,
consists of compositions in praise of heroes. Reflecting a con-
sciousness of referring to the past, and of preserving some
activities of the present, these are genres illustrated by verses
praising the generosity of a hero after a successful raid, as in
the dāna-stutis, and by passages praising those rājās who hosted
public sacrificial rituals—these being implicit strategies of le-
gitimation and declarations of identity. The subject of both was
the rājā, to be remembered because of his activities. Embedding
them in ritual texts was the method of ensuring that they would
be remembered.
The epics, the Mahābhārata and the Rāmāyaṇa, draw on the
idea of the dāna-stutis but extend it and deviate. They are not
stating the present position as much as looking back on the past
and recalling the societies of past times. These were clan societies,
as is evident from the Mahābhārata, and they were mutating into
kingdoms, which is equally evident from the Ramāyaṇa. Conflict
is over status, wealth, and control over territory. The identity of
the hero lies in his lineage, recorded as genealogy, and through
patterns of descent and alliances.
The epics are free-standing compositions but, at the same time,
pinned to the idea of ritual. The initial recitations of each epic take
place on ritual occasions. The interpolations in the Mahābhārata
are not casual additions because they change the purpose of the
text. Although the Mahābhārata is called an itihāsa, its claims to
history are still restricted to a consciousness of history without any
defining articulation. This contrasts strongly with the Jaina version
of the Rāmāyaṇa, the Paumacariyam, which states unequivocally
that it is narrating what actually happened, which is not identical
with the Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa, and claims historicity. The Rāmāyaṇa
in its original form takes the interface between clan societies and
kingdoms a step further. It projects an antagonism between them,
686 The Past Before Us
and at one level perhaps fantasizes the former into demons, a
fantasy powerfully challenged by the Jaina version. The Vālmīki
poem encapsulates the triumph of the kingdom.
The social melange of the epics is organized into clearer identi-
ties in what I have called the genealogical mode of representing
the past. The vaṃśānucarita section of the Viṣṇu Purāṇa is an
attempt at ordering the past in a pattern that is not conventionally
historical but is suggestive of a historical perspective. The remote
past is seen as the shadowy period of the Manus, terminated by
the Flood as a time-marker,3 which separates it from the lineages
of the kṣatriya descent groups. These, observing diverse patterns,
are slotted broadly into the Sūryavaṃśa or the Candravaṃśa.
Most from the latter group perish in the Kurukṣetra battle, which
becomes another time-marker, others fade out. The dynasties,
distinct from the clans, emerge subsequent to this. Many of these
are historically attested in inscriptions and other texts.
This appears to be a move towards creating a historical tradi-
tion. Was it due entirely to the emergence of kingdoms? Kingship
demands distinctive legitimation, yet the early dynasties did not
latch onto the kṣatriya lineages—as did the post-Gupta dynasties
who frequently called themselves kṣatriya. The administration of
kingdoms demands the keeping of records, including mention of
who ruled. Gift-giving was no longer of movable wealth on the
hoof, but began to include land, which involved the transfer of
property, and this again required recording.
Genealogies are useful to the beginnings of historical records
and provide a historical grid. They are flexible and can be stretched
and padded with names, or clipped, pruned, and telescoped. In
emphasizing succession they encouraged a chronological order-
ing that was linear in form. This hints at the beginnings of a his-
torical turn. Was this idea of history, spurred by socio-economic
change, also influenced by the alternative history maintained
in the Śramaṇa tradition of the Buddhists and Jainas? When
the Purāṇas began to be composed the Śramaṇas had sects, ran
3 The symbolism of the Flood was immense and varied as has been pointed
out by many, as for example A.K. Coomaraswamy, “The Flood in Hindu Tradi-
tion”, 398-407.
Therefore: Looking Back and Looking Forward 687
missions, were property-holders, and had been patronized by
royalty and by the wealthy. They were compiling histories of the
teaching and its institution, the Saṅgha. The epics having already
been appropriated to Bhagavatism, the authors of the Purāṇas may
have observed the advantages of creating a reasonably credible
past, or even many pasts, for those in authority. Additionally, it
could give identity to the emergent Puranic religion, and to its
sects aspiring to royal patronage, and thereby to acquiring pro-
perty.
The move towards envisaging a historical tradition can be seen
in other nascent forms, as in early inscriptions from the third
century bc to the sixth ad. These are a mix of royal statements
and those associated with support for sectarian religion. It was no
longer necessary to embed information in a ritual text. Statements
from the state or from established institutions carried enough
authority and, if properly recorded, could last in perpetuity. These
were some of the elements of what was to form the core of the
historical tradition in post-Gupta times.
The early inscriptions recorded the actions of kings, and of
other categories of people such as donors to religious institutions,
and were also intended to inform future generations. Some refer
to the past directly, as in the records spanning eight hundred years
of repairs to an embankment. Others do so inferentially, as for
example through venerating the relics of the dead. Invoking the
historical past was also a form of validating present action. This
continued to be so even when the inscriptions could no longer be
read, as in the case of those who inscribed their statements on a
pillar originally set up by Aśoka Maurya.
A more extensive recognition of the importance of historical
consciousness is demonstrated in plays using historical themes.
Viśākhadatta’s Mudrārākṣasa is a long view back over many
centuries to a prime historical moment—that of the transfer of
power from the Nandas to the Mauryas. The play represents his-
tory through depicting an event but with the dramatist’s licence to
imaginatively configure the reconstruction. The author presents
the historical role of Cāṇakya—as a political economist, as a
practising politician, and as a theorist drawing on rational argu-
ments. The familiarity with what were to become the legends
688 The Past Before Us
about Cāṇakya in the Sramanic tradition suggests that the latter
was being read by a wider audience of the literati than we have
assumed.
In describing the past as it was believed to have happened,
these texts point to the evolution of the itihāsa-purāṇa tradition.
The bardic tradition was at its elbow, as it were, and could not be
entirely ignored. But apart from this, the other category of writ-
ing that underlined the significance of history was the Sramanic
tradition.
3. Genres—II
I have referred to the Sramanic historical traditions as the alter-
native to the embedded brahmanical tradition, because in them
the choice of persons and events from the past are different, as are
the concerns. The Buddhist tradition is perhaps a more distinct
alternative with a more pronounced sense of history. The authority
in this tradition is the teaching of the Buddha incorporated and
propagated through the Saṅgha. Patrons do not create history by
their own actions so much as through the Saṅgha.
The writing of history therefore presumes that there be a record
of the organization of the Saṅgha. This is given in the Pāli Canon,
moving from an orally remembered account to texts recording it
as determined by the various Councils, whose history has also to
be recorded. Included in this is the presence of dissenting sects.
It is the Councils that give legitimacy to the particular sects that
emerge, debating the veracity of what the Buddha is said to have
taught and explaining why deviations, even if recognized as such,
have to be accommodated. The authority of the Saṅgha in each
case is backed by political authority—Ajātaśatru, Aśoka, Kaniṣka.
The association with the term śāsana—teaching, instruction,
order—is both telling and pertinent. The history of a major monas-
tery, the Mahāvihāra, encapsulates the relationship between the
king and the Saṅgha.4 In the case of Aśoka, the manner in which
both Hīnayāna and Mahāyāna Buddhism appropriate the king as
4 The Mahāvaṃsa, for instance, suggests some parallels of purpose with the
third-century ad History of the Church by Eusebius.
Therefore: Looking Back and Looking Forward 689
patron becomes apparent in their writings. Whereas Aśoka’s policy
of dhamma, as defined in his edicts, is not merely the propagation
of Buddhism, but rather an attempt to persuade people to observe
an ethic conducive to social well being, the Buddhist tradition
projects him as a patron of the Saṅgha, concerned almost solely
with the advancement of Buddhism.
Apart from the various sectarian splits a major division was that
of Hīnayāna and Mahāyāna Buddhism, the latter often referred
to as Northern Buddhism. Unlike the texts from the Sri Lankan
Theravāda, history in the Northern tradition is often articulated as
biographies of the Buddha and of important patrons and Elders.
Where teaching was hemmed in by competing religious sects
and the Saṅgha was not politically powerful, it may have been
thought that the more effective way of using history to establish
the authority of Buddhism was through such biographies. The
concept of the exemplar would carry weight. There was therefore a
temptation to turn biography into hagiography, further emphasized
by the increasing importance of the concept of the bodhisattva.
The prediction of the decline of the teaching introduces chiliastic
notions that also require some delineation of a past that differs
from the present.
These texts claim to be historical and would have been noticed
even if not referred to, and up to a point perhaps the format was
imitated in the itihāsa-purāṇa tradition that followed. It was
doubtless noticed that claiming a history enhanced one’s authority,
whether personal or institutional. Sects of the Puranic religions
imitated the Sramanic institutions in setting up their maṭhas and
ghaṭikās, and would seem to have become more aware of the use
of history.
Hovering in the background, and possibly more influential
to the understanding of history than we have conceded, was
the powerful debate, vādavidya, between the Buddhists and the
Naiyāyikās—those of the Nyāya school of philosophy.5 This
con ti nued from the second century bc to the sixth ad, and was
5 B. Matilal, The Character of Logic in India; S. Sarukkai, Indian Phi-
losophy and the Philosophy of Science, 1ff., 209ff.; R. King, Indian Philosophy,
198–229.
690 The Past Before Us
subsequently picked up again. Beginning with Nāgarjuna and
continuing with Dinnaga and Dharmakīrti, Buddhist philosphers
argued with Naiyāyikās on the centrality and role of logic in
debate. This involved questions on the importance of evidence,
perception, causality, and inference. The procedures of the debate
were also set out, moving from statement to evidence to example.
Historical examples are not necessarily quoted in the debate, but
the implications of the discussion would have affected scholarship
and been of interest to those narrating the past and the present.
4. The Genres—III
The genres of the post-Gupta period were new and different from
the earlier ones. They consisted in the main of caritas (historical
biographies), inscriptions that were effectively dynastic annals,
and vaṃśāvalīs (chronicles). In their forms and in what they record
they move from historical traditions to the nuclei of historical
writing.
In the changing polity and society of the time, political control
was extended in various ways. New territory with a settled popu-
lation was conquered and incorporated in the earlier manner, but
additionally, sparsely populated frontier zones could be colonized
and forest-dwellers assimilated by converting them into peasants
and introducing caste as a mechanism of control. This involved
adjusting the new rules of kinship, cultural patterns, and customary
law that came with this assimilation. The insistent emphasis on ob-
serving the varṇāśramadharma in newly-created kingdoms could
have been an attempt to gloss over deviations. Hierarchy replaced
egalitarian forms, with frequent references to kṣatriya status and
demarcated from the śūdra. Hence the Puranic prophecy that new
kṣatriyas would be created and these would require validation of
their status. Divinizing the king was thought of as one solution.
The other was bestowing kṣatriya status on him. However, neither
was sufficient as these changes merely isolated him or became so
common as not to be taken too seriously.
Up to a point, events shape the narrative and there can be an
attempt to ascertain what happened.6 History was to be represented
6 G.M. Spiegel, The Past as Text, 99ff.
Therefore: Looking Back and Looking Forward 691
and not analysed. Legends were not discontinued and sources were
implied rather than discussed, with some exceptions. Changes
in society required to be melded, preferably with some point of
identity. It could be argued that the new genres were attempting to
do this by providing a past that was more credible than it had been
earlier, and by recoding and recording the events of the present
for use in the construction of such a past, and for the future.
The intention of the carita (biography) was to locate a person
of significance in moments of consequence and allow glimpses of
that person and those moments. This was done through the many
layers that converged: from formulaic treatment and some possible
familiarity with the Sramanic biographical forms, from the inno-
vation of the genre as court literature, and from the historicity of
the person. The biography became a document of contemporary
polity but introduced some elements of past history, whether re-
mote or recent. The contemporary polity could be the establishing
of sovereignty, as in the Harṣacarita, or battling against competi-
tors and/or rebellious subordinates, as in the Rāmacarita. Dynas-
tic history is included as a way not only of providing a context,
but also giving validity to royal actions. In the two biographies
discussed here, political and historical concerns drive the narrat-
ive even if it is presented in kāvya form. These concerns were
pervasive in establishing kingship but become more visible in
texts such as these.
Inscriptions ceased to be fragmentary statements from the
court, or brief records. They included elaborate official state-
ments, often issued by the king or on his behalf, and when read
sequentially over a number of reigns they constitute the annals
of the kingdom. The initial section carries a benediction invok-
ing the deity, followed by a brief history of the dynasty, ruler by
ruler, culminating with the contemporary one. Titles are given,
conquests listed, and alliances mentioned. References are made
to problems with neighbours, with aliens, with the forest tribes,
and suchlike. This is the praśasti (eulogy), in which history is the
source of the dynasty’s legitimacy, maintained as a record. Sub-
sequent to this comes the purpose of the inscription, which also
on occasion carries some historical information apart from the
immediate royal order. Further validation requires mentioning
692 The Past Before Us
the authorship of the text and the precise date and era. Ministerial
families or those of wealthy merchants, declaring their status, also
issued inscriptions which included statements on the history of
the family. Votive inscriptions, longer than earlier ones, carried
the family history of the donor, even if briefly.
By way of contrast, and at the end of the discussion of Candella
inscriptions, I have included the bardic epic of the hero Ālhā,
which narrates events in the declining years of Candella rule
and provides a view of the rule from a subaltern or subordinate
perspective. It is not a eulogy and presents person and event in
a more realistic setting, but within the formulaic structure of a
bardic composition, which has its own perspective. It is not the
story of the victor, or one who claims to be so, as in the other
genres of this time, and the view is from lesser but perhaps more
independent participants. It may initially have been composed in
times contemporary with the persons it refers to, but much of it
has later additions—memories of succeeding generations—as is
usual with oral transmissions. So essentially what we have is a
later view of an earlier period, and a particular view claiming to
be historical but not directing us to specific sources.
Some royal courts encouraged the keeping of a vaṃśāvalī.
This could be written as a text recording history at a point in time
by a single person, as with Kalhaṇa and the Rājataraṅgiṇī, and
Merutuṅga with the Prabandha-cintāmaṇi. Or, it could be kept
as a court record and updated from time to time by successive
authors, as is likely with the Chamba vaṃśāvalī. The chronicle
had a wider assessment of the past and reflected a broad span of
opinion, leaving the main ideological intention to the author—
where there was a single one.
Following the pattern of the vaṃśānucarita, chronicles seem
to follow three phases. There is first a statement on the origins
of the region. This can be mythical and replete with fantasy. The
second phase suggests links with the heroes of the lineages, often
through some association with an event from the Mahābhārata,
or refers to local heroes of a distant past. The most substantial
part of the chronicle is the third phase, that of the establishing of
the kingdom and its dynastic history, highlighting those that are
remembered as persons of consequence. The narration may be
Therefore: Looking Back and Looking Forward 693
hesitant and uncertain to begin with, but there is always a point
when it becomes confident, coinciding with more certain histori-
cal sources.
The three chronicles that I have discussed differ in many ways.
The Rājataraṅginī is an intellectually sophisticated historical
narrative describing the evolution of the kingdom of Kashmir.
Kalhaṇa is particular about stating his sources and even assesses
their reliability. His analysis of dynastic history is remarkable for
the span of interests he includes, such as threatening neighbours,
the politics of feudatories, political and religious factions at the
court, hydraulic engineering, and fiscal problems that led to the
oppression of peasants and to the plundering of temples by kings
and their officers. The logic of actions and politics emanates from
political concerns but pervades a wide social range. Its historical
perspective is undeniable and was recognized a couple of centu-
ries ago.
The Chamba vaṃśāvalī is the history of a small kingdom, the
narrative just about rising above minimal information. An inte-
resting aspect is the transition of deriving legitimacy from the
local siddhas and Nātha yogīs to the better recognized mainstream
Śaiva and Bhāgavata sects. This seems to demarcate the sources of
legitimacy required in the earlier phase from those needed when
the kingdom is established.
The Prabandha-cintāmaṇi of Merutuṅga, coming essentially
from the Sramanic tradition, shows a clear sense of the histori-
cal, but with a Jaina ideological focus. The narrative covers the
activities of the kings of three dynasties of Gujarat, but stays for
longer on Kumārapāla, whom the author claims was converted
to Jainism by his minister, Hemacandra. The conversion has to
be highlighted.
Of all the genres discussed here, each follows from and yet
in some ways marks a departure from the previous one. This
reflects the degree to which the awareness of history—whether
consciously or subconsciously—increases. Where the degree of
history changes, its record will also change in form, and in lan-
guage if need be.
Some of these texts are referred to as kāvyas (literary composi-
tions, generally a poem), since the distinction between kāvya and
694 The Past Before Us
itihāsa was not strictly defined nor observed. Kāvya could also
refer to the literary form irrespective of the contents, which allows
for an overlap in nomenclature. Literary and historical writing is
often close in form, with time, place, and person being important
to both. That these texts were referred to as kāvyas does not mean
that their historical orientation was not recognized.
The genres discussed pertain largely to social groups constitut-
ing the elite or those in their proximity. They do not reflect the
entire society. Unfortunately, the larger part of society has not left
us texts that inform us about how they looked at the past; or, we
have yet to discover ways of prising out that information from
existing texts.
5. Authorship and Audience
The change in genre assumes changes in authorship and audience.
It is possible that the initial compositions of the hero-lauds and
the epics, were by bards and poets attached to the clans, but were
worked over by brāhmaṇas with a literary bent. The audiences
for both would have been gatherings of clan members and others.
The Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa in its original shorter form probably had
just the one author, who collated the legends and knit them into
a single story. The text would later incorporate additions. Public
recitations would again have been common, as also some smaller
gatherings such as in the royal courts, starting with those of the
early kingdoms and continuing into later times.
The authors of the Purāṇas were brāhmaṇas who collated the
material from various sources. For the vaṃśānucarita section,
the data would have come from the Vedic corpus and from oral
sources such as the genealogies of the bards. These texts were re -
cited and read in agrahāras, in temples, at places of pilgrimage,
and at various ritual gatherings. That their recitations were in
demand is evident from the category of professionals referred to
as the paurāṇikas.
The Buddhist texts were largely composed by learned monks
and written as the history of the teaching and of the Saṅgha,
intended both for the discipline of monks and for the edification
of the lay community. The purpose of the texts is evident and the
Therefore: Looking Back and Looking Forward 695
intention single-minded. They were copied and kept in the mon-
asteries so as to be easily consulted.
Inscriptions, both early and late, being statements associated
with rulers, involved the court and administration. Their authors
therefore could be court officials or court poets and they rendered
the orders of the king in appropriate language. Some carried
brāhmaṇa names and others towards the later period identified
themselves as kāyasthas. The latter were recruited especially as
administrators and scribes in addition to brāhmaṇas employed in
this capacity. The inscriptions were composed by persons of the
upper castes at the court, but the actual engraving was done by
those of lower-caste status.
Inscriptions were intended to be read by, or read to, the public,
so the audience rippled out from the court circles to the populace.
This was a narrower audience than that for the epic of Ālhā, which
was doubtless known from village to village in the region. The
bard in this case was said to be a kinsman of one of the queens,
but this did not necessarily make him a kṣatriya.
It was again in the context of the court and the literati that plays
were performed and the royal biographies read. This demanded a
combination of fine poetry and scholarship, evident in the plays,
the caritas, and the chronicles discussed: the Rājataraṅgiṇī is a his-
tory that is relatively secular whereas the Prabandha-cintāmaṇi,
also relatively secular in concept, does succumb to the power of
Jaina belief. The Chamba vaṃśāvalī is largely just a record of
events. It claims to be written by the rājaguru, or a succession of
them, but the language suggests a person not so literate in Sanskrit
and possibly from a family of locally recruited brāhmaṇas.
Given the variety of genres and authors, the language also chang -
ed. Sanskrit—Vedic and Classical—was used in the texts of the
itihāsa-purāṇa tradition. Pāli, Prākrit, and Sanskrit were the lang-
uages of the various Sramanic writings, some of which were sub-
sequently translated into Tibetan, Chinese, and other languages, in
which we have them today. Inscriptions were initially written in
Prākrit, followed by Sanskrit, but by the late first millennium ad
they began to use the emerging regional languages. These latter
languages were also used in the epics of the bards in the second
millennium ad.
696 The Past Before Us
6. Why is there a Turn to the Historical?
The need for the historical in early India becomes critical at two
points in the evolution of authority. The first is when authority is
being initially established and often amidst competition from rival
groups, which therefore requires a statement on claims to incor-
porate believed history; and the second is when there has been a
crisis and the authority has almost disappeared but has either been
salvaged or has become the narrative of the successor.
At the simplest level, the turn to the historical is intended to
record the present and implicitly compare it to the past, and to
record something that would be available to the future. In time, the
record comes to represent the past and has to be conserved. This
could mean having to select what of the past should be conserved.
But it is not just any past, it must have a meaning for the present.
In the process of pruning, the requirements may change. Is the
record meticulously preserved? Or is it adjusted in accordance
with contemporary needs? Preserved records recall the past but
have to be seen from the perspective of the various points in time
when they were recalled—and that perspective differs from the
one of our times.
The past needs to be recalled for a variety of purposes, not least
because it establishes the identity of those in power. This can be
done by making connections, as also by providing exemplars. This
is made evident from the narratives chosen and examples quoted
in the Mahābhārata and the Purāṇas and in the biographies. This
was important to the understanding of itihāsa.7 Connections with
persons of significance and participation in important events of the
past bestow legitimacy. Latching on to the lineages of the Solar and
Lunar lines of the Purāṇas in the post-Gupta period was part of
the search for legitimacy from the past. It was important therefore
to conserve the vaṃśānucarita section of these texts. The question
of whether or not the ancestors of a family had participated in the
7 M. Tokunaga, “Vedic Exegesis and Epic Poetry: A Note on atrāpy
udāharanti”, in P. Koskikallio (ed.), Parallels and Comparisons, 21–30. Exam-
ples were an essential component of itihāsa: atrāpy udāharantīmam itihāsam
purātanam is the phrase repeated so often. Quoted in J. Fitzgerald, “History
and Primordium in Ancient Indian Historical Writing: Itihāsa and Purāṇa in
the Mahābhārata and Beyond” (forthcoming).
Therefore: Looking Back and Looking Forward 697
battle at Kurukṣetra was part of drawing on the past and may not
have been intended literally. The aspect of the past that is recalled
is relevant to why it is needed in the present.
Legitimation also requires someone with credibility to do the
legitimizing. This can be indirect, as when a connection is made
to a narrative in an earlier text, but nevertheless needs an en-
dorsement from those who are the authors and controllers of the
tradition—bards, priests, monks, court poets, court officials. The
credibility of the person who controls the data is essential.
Association with divinity was resorted to in some traditions,
but not generally in the Sramanic. Divinity is malleable and the
gods play along with local politics. This is very distant from the
sternness of history having to follow the will of God. Divinity as
a causal factor occurs in three ways: the king may be imbued with
elements of deity, or may be in communication with deity, or may
be an incarnation. Endorsement from local cult figures and ascetics
was also drawn upon. Renunciation plays a role in narratives, but
perhaps not always in a literal sense. When a king is said to have
renounced the throne to become an ascetic, one wonders if this
is a polite way of stating that he was forced to abdicate, or that
usurpation was being recorded under the pretence of continuity.
In each case the form had to be relevant to the audience for which
the claim was intended.
What is being validated are the qualifications of the persons
or the institution seeking authority and status. This could be the
authority to be the rājā of a clan, or to rule a kingdom, or to
constitute a Saṅgha. It becomes particularly necessary in a so-
ciety where political power is relatively open but the assertion of
power requires conventional trappings—either acculturation to
Sanskritic culture or the observance of Sramanic values. What is
being recalled varies according to the record of their activities and
the requirements of the present. It can be the actions of heroes,
clans, battles, and emerging kingship—as in the epics and Purāṇas.
For later times it was the creation of kingdoms and the acquiring
of sovereignty.
Concepts of time also become part of this process, especially in
the interface of cyclic and linear time. The cyclic time of cosmo-
logy plays on imagined numbers, some drawn from astronomy and
some invented. The sequencing presents various mathematical
698 The Past Before Us
patterns. The figures have some links with the cosmology of an-
cient societies with which there was dialogue, the Mesopotamian
and the Hellenistic. Cycles of time had captured the imagination of
the ancient world. The patterns seem to represent an image of how
human interaction with time was perceived rather than an exact
measurement of time. It was probably also meant to place human
activities in remote or recent time. It constituted a vision of the
universe in its immeasurable size, contrasted with the smallness
of the human. The contradiction in this construction as pertaining
to history is that the length of each age is so unreal that the re-
petitions of the cycle remain a grand but historically meaningless
concept. Therefore the end of one yuga and the start of the next
is not precisely defined, as with the more than one occasion on
which the Kaliyuga is said to start.
However, the two forms, cyclic and linear, were not projected
as dichotomous. They were separated by function. Thus, the cycle
did not close at the point where it began but continued into the next
cycle, and, doing this over four cycles, created a spiral or a helix.
A spiral when stretched becomes a wavy line, and if sufficiently
stretched can almost become a straight line. The working out of
the yuga cosmology coincides with observing linear time in his-
torical records. This is characteristic of both the itihāsa-purāṇa
and the Sramanic traditions. It is almost as if the cycles of time
were thought to belong to another dimension of reckoning, from
which history was generally but not invariably insulated. Or else
a distinction was being made between fantasy and the credible.
In the interface of cyclic and linear there is a potential of more
than just two concepts of time. The intersection is very occasion-
ally directly stated, as in the inscription of Pulakeśin II, where
the calculation of both the Vikrama samvat and the Kaliyuga are
given.8 More frequently it is implied, as in the vaṃśānucarita
which, constructed in linear time, is located in the Purāṇa—which
otherwise endorses cyclic time. This could therefore be seen as a
linear fraction of the cosmic cyclic arc.
The more exact measurement of time by which human activity
could be approximately dated was calculated in linear time. This
was a coming together of various linear forms of calculation:
8 Aihole Inscription, Ep. Ind., 6, 1ff.
Therefore: Looking Back and Looking Forward 699
genea logies, regnal years, a fixed chronological point for reckoning
such as the parinirvāṇa, and the much more precisely calculated
use of eras drawing on both astronomy and history. The last two of
these forms were used extensively in the Sramanic tradition and
in inscriptions and historical genres of the itihāsa-purāṇa tradi-
tion. Linearity tends to give a sharper and more manageable sense
of time.
How then do all these texts relate to history? They are essen-
tially narrations of how the past, recent or remote, was visual-
ized. This may, however, on occasion require a description of the
present as well, in part to point up the difference. They locate and
interconnect persons and events in space and in a chronological
sequence of time, although this latter in the earlier texts need not
be calculated as numerical dates.
The use of what is thought to be historical surfaces in situations
of crisis. The battle at Kurukṣetra brought to an end the kṣatriya
clans, so this had to be recorded and explained. The vaṃśānucarita
section of the Viṣṇu Purāṇa is an attempt to order and define the
past more precisely by stating the importance of the lineages in
earliest times and registering the change to kingdoms in more
recent times. The Sramanic tradition presents a different past for
different reasons. It is not a continuation of the first two and is
therefore not referred to. It has its own history.
Each authority seeks validation from the past. The lineages
as recorded in the Purāṇa are validating a segment of the past.
But they are also providing for dynasties to acquire status should
they wish to latch themselves onto these lineages as part of their
ancestral claims, even if it means manipulating history. The sanc-
tion of the past imbues it with credibility.
A commonly believed history confirms an identity, since the
construction of history is also stating identities. This is an evident
message of the Sramanic tradition. It began as an alternative tra-
dition and consolidated its position by insisting on a history of
sequential events. This had to be adjusted to the many dissident
groups that evolved, each with their authority, which created
innumerable situations of crises. These were doubtless changes
that were observed, discussed, and debated by all concerned,
apart from the Sramaṇa groups. If there is a difference between
one historical tradition and another, as with the itihāsa-purāṇa
700 The Past Before Us
and the Sramanic, then, although the one does not refer to the
other, it could well have internalized some aspects of it, as I have
tried to argue. A juxtaposition of the two becomes necessary to
ascertain the dialogue. The employment of the past to create an
identity seems to be reflected in the new genres that emerged in
the post-Gupta period.
The ordering of the past as history becomes all the more neces -
sary when there is a crisis of acculturation with new groups
having to be adjusted in existing society, but with the probability
that new identities will have to be forged. There is therefore a need
to be inclusive in periods of historical change. The justification
for setting aside social codes, or reiterating other codes, often
comes from a reading of the past, as for instance in the form of
examples. Given the range of non-conformity in those times, it
might have been useful to keep the past a trifle vague so that in-
novations could be more easily accommodated.
The centrality of explanation in the historical narrative varied
from text to text. The Buddhist tradition introduces a degree of
causality, which is not surprising given that causality is significant
to Buddhist thinking. The crisis of dissidence may have intensi-
fied the need for explaining it, and the explanation could extend
to other matters as well. Personal characteristics play a role in the
actions of the protagonists. In the itihāsa-purāṇa tradition, expla-
nation is not reflected in the narration of the change from lineage
to dynasty in the Purāṇa, but in the biographies and the chronicles
explanations are sometimes given for historical change, for the
ambition of rulers, and for times of crises—although the simplest
is to ascribe decline to the inevitability of the Kaliyuga.
Despite the length of this book, I am aware that my discus-
sion touches only the surface of these texts. Ideally, a study such
as this requires examining the various recensions (sometimes
in more than one language), ascertaining their authenticity, and
analysing them for historical content. This would also demonstrate
the process by which the text was composed or compiled, as has
been done for a few.9 Such studies would help us understand the
9 The Gopālarājāvaṃśāvalī; M. Witzel, “On Indian Historical Writing”, 2,
1–57.
Therefore: Looking Back and Looking Forward 701
projection of history in early India, would take a few lifetimes,
and depend on an extensive range of expertise. Hopefully some
may think it worthwhile.
But somewhere a beginning has to be made towards think-
ing about the idea of history in early India, and that is what this
book has attempted. I have tried to argue that there is what might
be called a historiographical trajectory, although not altogether
smooth, in the texts to which I have referred. This points to a
concern with a historical past, even if this past is constructed in
ways different from what we conventionally regard as historical.
I have argued that a sense of history and historical conscious-
ness existed, that there were historical traditions emerging from
diverse historiographies, and that these occasionally took the form
of historical writing.
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Agni Purāṇa, Poona, 1900.
Aitareya Āraṇyaka, A.B. Keith (ed. and trans.), Oxford, 1909.
Aitareya Brāhmaṇa, A.B. Keith (trans.), Delhi, 1971 (rpnt).
Alberuni’s India, E.P. Sachau (ed. and trans.), vols I & II, Delhi, 1964
(rpnt).
Aṅguttara Nikāya, R. Morris and E. Hardy (eds), London, 1885–1900.
Antiquities of Chamba, vol. I, J. Ph. Vogel, vol. II, B. Ch. Chhabra (ed.),
Calcutta, 1911, Delhi, 1957.
Āpastamba Dharmasūtra, G. Bühler (trans.), Delhi, 1975 (rpnt).
Āpastamba Dharmasūtra, P. Olivelle (trans.), New York, 1999.
Āpastamba Śrauta Sūtra, R. Garbe, Calcutta, 1882–1902.
Āryamañjuśrīmūlakalpa, T.N. Ganapati Sastri (ed.), Trivandrum Sanskrit
Series, Trivandrum, 1925.
Āryamañjuśrīmūlakalpa, K.P. Jayaswal (ed. and trans.), An Imperial History
of India, Lahore, 1934.
Arrian, Anabasis Alexandri, Books V to VII, Indica, P.A. Brunt (trans.),
History of Alexander, and Indica, vol. II, Cambridge (Mass.), 1983.
Arrian’s Indica, J.W. McCrindle (trans.), Ancient India as Described by
Megasthenes and Arrian, London, 1877.
Arthaśāstra, R.P. Kangle (ed.), Bombay, 1965.
Aṣṭādhyāyī of Pāṇini (2 vols), S.C. Vasu (ed. and trans.), Delhi, 1969
(rpnt).
Āśvalāyana Gṛihyasūtra, H. Oldenberg (ed. and trans.), The Gṛihya-sūtras,
2 vols, Delhi, 1964 (rpnt).
Āśvalāyana Śrautasūtra, K. Mylius (ed.), Wichtrach, 1994.
Atharvaveda, W.D. Whitney (trans.), Delhi, 1971 (rpnt).
Bāṇabhaṭṭa’s Harṣacarita, K.P. Parab (ed.), Bombay, 1925.
Baudhāyana Dharmasūtra, P. Olivelle (trans.), New York, 1999.
Bibliography 703
Baudhāyana Śrauta Sūtra, W. Caland (ed.), New Delhi, 1982 (rpnt).
Bhadrabāhu cāṇakya candragupta kathānaka evam rājā kalkivarṇan, R.R.
Jain (ed.), Varanasi, 1982.
Bhāgavata Purāṇa, V.L. Pansikar (ed.), Bombay, 1920.
Bhāgavata Purāṇa, J.L. Shastri (ed.), New Delhi, 1976/1986 (rpnts).
Bhaviṣya Purāṇa, Kśemarāja Srīkṛṣṇadāsa (ed.), Bombay, 1897.
Bilhaṇa’s Vikramāṅkadevacarita, S.C. Banerji and A.K. Gupta (trans.),
Calcutta, 1965.
Book of Kindred Sayings: Saṃyutta-nikāya, The, vol. II, C.A.S. Rhys Davids
(trans.), London, 1972 (rpnt.). Also see below, Saṃyutta-nikāya.
Book of the Discipline, The (Vinaya Piṭaka), 6 vols, I.B. Horner (trans.), London,
1938–66. Also see below, Vinaya Piṭaka.
Bṛhad-devatā, A.A. Macdonell (ed. and trans.), Bṛhad-devatā Attributed
to Śaunaka, Cambridge (Mass.), 1904.
Bṛhad-devatā, M. Tokunaga (ed. and trans.), Kyoto, 1997.
Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa, K. Srikrishnadas (ed.), Bombay, 1913.
Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa, G.V. Tagare (trans. and annotated), Delhi, 1983.
Buddhacarita: Life of the Buddha by Ashvaghosha, P. Olivelle (trans.),
New York, 2008.
Buddhacarita, or the Acts of the Buddha, The, E.H. Johnston (ed. and trans.),
Delhi, 1972 (rpnt).
Buddhaghosācārya Papañcasudāni (Majjhimanikāya-aṭṭakathā), J.H.
Woods, D. Kosambi, and I.B. Horner (eds), London, 1922–38.
Caurapañcāśikā, S.N. Tadpatrikar (ed.), Poona, 1946.
Collection of the Middle Length Sayings, The, 3 vols, I.B. Horner (trans.),
London, 1954–9.
Corpus of Bengal Inscriptions, R. Mukherjee and S. Maity (eds), Calcutta,
1967.
Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum
I: E. Hultzsch (ed.), London, 1888–1925.
III: J.F. Fleet (ed.), Varanasi, 1970.
III: (revised edn), B.C. Chhabra and G.S. Gai (ed.), Delhi, 1981.
IV: V.V. Mirashi (ed.), Ootacamund, 1955.
V: V.V. Mirashi (ed.), Ootacamund, 1963.
Corpus of Sharda Inscriptions from Kashmir, B.K. Kaul (ed.), Delhi,
1982.
Cūlavamsa, W. Geiger (trans.), London, 1973.
Devī-Bhāgavata Purāṇa, Swami Vijnananda (ed.), Allahabad, 1921.
Dharmakośa, Laxmanshastri Joshi (ed.), Satara, 1937–53.
Dialogues of the Buddha, The, T.W. Rhys Davids and J.E. Carpenter (eds),
London, 1890–1911.
704 Bibliography
Dialogues of the Buddha, The, 3 vols, T.W. Rhys Davids and C.A.F. Rhys
Davids (trans.), London, 1899–1921.
Dīgha-nikāya, B.J. Kashyap (gen. ed.), Patna, 1958.
Dīpavaṃsa, The, H. Oldenberg (ed. and trans.), London, 1879.
Divyāvadāna, E.B. Cowell and R.A. Neill (eds), Cambridge, 1886.
Divyāvadāna, P.L. Vaidya (ed.), Darbhanga, 1959.
Dravidian Etymological Dictionary, T. Burrow and M.B. Emeneau (eds),
Oxford, 1961.
Epigraphia Indica, New Delhi.
Epigraphia Zeylanica, Colombo.
Fo-pen-hsing-chi-ching, S. Beal (trans.), The Romantic Legend of Sakya
Buddha, London, 1875.
Gautama Dharmasūtra, P. Olivelle (trans.), New York, 1999.
Geography of Strabo, The, H.L. Jones (trans.), London, 1966 (rpnt).
Gopālarājavaṃśāvalī, The, D. Vajrācārya and K.P. Malla (ed. and trans.),
Wiesbaden, 1985.
Gopatha Brāhmaṇa, R. Mitra and H. Vidyabhushan (eds), Calcutta,
1872.
Harṣa-carita of Bāṇa, The, E.B. Cowell and F.W. Thomas (trans.), London,
1929.
Harshacarita of Bāṇabhaṭṭa, The, P.V. Kane (ed.), Delhi, 1965
(2nd edn).
Hemacandra’s Dvyāśraya-mahākāvyam, A.V. Kathavaṭe (ed.), Delhi,
1996.
Hemacandra’s Kumārapāla-carita, S.P. Pandit and P.L. Vaidya (eds), Poona,
1936.
Hesiod’s Theogony: Works and Days, D. Wender (trans.), Harmondsworth,
1973.
Hymns of the Ṛgveda, R.T.H. Griffith (trans.), Varanasi, 1963 (4th edn).
Inscriptions of Bengal, N.G. Majumdar (ed.), Rajshahi, 1929.
Jaiminīya Brāhmaṇa, H.W. Bodewitz (ed.), Leiden, 1973.
Jaiminīya Upaniṣad Brāhmaṇa, H. Oertel (trans.), New Haven, 1894.
Jātaka, The, E.B. Cowell (ed.), London, 1969 (9th edn).
Jinavijayamuni, Kumārapāla-caritra-saṁgraha, vol. 41, Bombay, 1956.
Jinaprabhāsūri, Vividhatīrthakalpa, Jinavijayamuni (ed.), Bombay,
1934.
Jinasena, Ādipurāṇa, Pannālāl Jaina (ed.), Calcutta, 1963–5.
Kalhaṇa’s Rājataraṅgiṇī, Chronicle of the Kings of Kashmir, Sanskrit Text
with Critical Notes, M.A. Stein (ed.), Bombay, 1892/1979 (rpnt).
Kāmandaka, Nītisāra, T.N. Ganapati Sastri (ed.), Trivandrum, 1912. See
also below, Nītisāra.
Bibliography 705
Kāṭhaka Saṃhitā, V. Schroeder (ed.), Leipzig, 1900–11.
Kathāvatthu, A.C. Taylor (ed.), vols I and II, London, 1894–7/1979
(rpnt).
Kātyāyana Śrauta Sūtra, V. Sarma (ed.), Banares, 1933–7.
Kauṣītaki Brāhmaṇa, E.B. Cowell (ed.), Calcutta, 1861; A.B. Keith (trans.),
Delhi, 1971 (rpnt).
Kumārapāla-prabandha-pratibodha: see below, Somaprabhācārya.
Kunāla Jātaka, W.B. Bollee (ed. and trans.), London, 1970.
La Geste de Rāma: Poeme a double sens de Sandhyākaranandin, S. Broc-
quet (ed.), Pondicherry, 2010.
Lalitavistara, S. Lefmann (ed.), Halle, 1902–8.
Lalitavistara, R. Mitra (ed.), Calcutta, 1877–81.
Lāṭyāyana Śrauta Sūtra (3 vols), H.G. Ranade (ed. and trans.), New Delhi,
1998.
Lekhapaddhati, P. Prasad (ed. and trans.), Delhi, 2007.
Law Code of Viṣṇu, The: A Critical Edition and Annotated Translation of
the Vaiṣṇava-Dharmaśāstra, P. Olivelle (trans.), Cambridge, Mass.,
2009.
Life of Hiuen-Tsiang by the Shaman Hwui Li, The, S. Beal (ed. and trans.),
London, 1911.
Life of the Buddha and the Early History of the Order, The, W.W. Rockhill
(trans.), Varanasi, 1972 (rpnt).
Mahābhārata, The, 19 vols, V.S. Sukthankar, S.K. Belvalkar, and
P.L.Vaidya, et al. (eds), Critical Edition, Poona, 1933–66.
Mahābhārata, The, vols 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, J.A.B. van Buitenen (trans.), Chicago,
1973.
Mahābhārata, The, vols 11, 12, J.L. Fitzgerald (trans.), Chicago, 2004.
Mahāvaṃsa, W. Geiger (trans.), London, 1912/1964 (rpnt).
Mahāvastu, J.J. Jones (trans.), London, 1973 (rpnt).
Mahāvastu, 3 vols, E. Senart (ed.), Paris, 1987–97.
Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, V. Schroeder (ed.), Leipzig, 1881–6.
Majjhima-nikāya, The, 3 vols, V. Trenckner and R. Chalmers (eds), London,
1888–96.
Manu’s Code of Law, P. Olivelle (ed. and trans.), New Delhi, 2006.
Matsya Purāṇa, H.N. Apte (ed.), Poona, 1907.
Megasthenes’ Indica, J.W. McCrindle (trans.), Ancient India as Described by
Megasthenes and Arrian, London, 1877.
Merutuṅga, Prabandha-cintāmaṇi, ed. Jinavijayamuni, 1933, Santi­
niketan.
Milinda-pañho, V. Trenckner (ed.), London, 1880; T.W. Rhys Davids
706 Bibliography
(trans.), The Questions of King Milinda, New York, 1963 (rpnt.). Also
see below, Rhys Davids, T.W.
Minor Anthologies of the Pali Canon, The, I.B. Horner (trans.), vol. III,
London, 1975.
Mudrārākṣasa of Viśākhadatta, M.R. Kale (ed.), Delhi, 1976.
Mudrārākṣasa or The Signet Ring, K.H. Dhruva (ed.), Poona, 1930
(3rd edn).
Mudrārākṣasa of Viśākhadatta, C.R. Devadhar and V.M. Bedekar (eds),
Bombay, 1948.
Nāradasmṛti, The, R.W. Lariviere (ed. and trans.), vols I and II, Phila-
delphia, 1989.
Nighantu tathā Nirukta, Laksman Svarup (ed.), Delhi, 1967.
Nirukta of Yāska, B. Bhattacharya (ed.), Yāska’s Nirukta, Calcutta, 1958.
Nītisāra of Kāmandaka, Trivandrum Sanskrit Series, no. XIV, Trivan-
drum, 1912. See also above, Kāmandaka.
Padma Purāṇa, V.N. Mandlik (trans.), Poona, 1893–4.
Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa, W. Caland (trans.), Calcutta, 1982 (rpnt).
Pariśiṣṭaparvan, H. Jacobi (ed.), Calcutta, 1932 (2nd edn).
Parmāl Rāso, S.S. Das (ed.), Benaras 1919.
Patañjali’s Vyākaraṇa-Mahābhāṣya, S.D. Joshi (trans. and ed), Poona,
1968.
Paumacariyam, vols I and II, H. Jacobi (ed.), Ācārya Vimalasūri’s Pau-
macariyam, Varanasi, 1962.
Plato: Timaeus, R.G. Bury (trans.), London, 1952.
Pliny: Natural History, H. Rackham (trans.), Ann Arbor, 2004 (rpnt).
Points of Controversy: The Kathāvatthu, Shwe Zan Aung and C. Rhys
Davids (trans.), London, 1915.
Prabandha-cintāmaṇi of Merutuṅga Ācārya, The (The Wishing-stone of
Narratives), C.H. Tawney (trans.), Calcutta, 1899/1907 (rpnt).
Prabodhacandrodaya, V.L. Pansikar (ed.), Bombay, 1924.
Rājataraṅgiṇī, M.A. Stein (ed. and trans.), Kalhaṇa’s Rājataraṅgiṇī, or, A
Chronicle of the Kings of Kaśmir, Delhi, 1960/1979 (rpnt).
Rāmacarita by Sandhyākara Nandi, Haraprasad Sastri (ed.), Memoirs of
the Asiatic Society of Bengal, 3, 1–56, Calcutta, 1910.
Rāmacarita of Sandhyākaranandin, Revised with English Translation
and Notes, Memoirs of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, R. Basak (ed.),
Calcutta, 1969.
Rāmacaritam of Sandhyākaranandin, The, Edited with Sanskrit Commen-
taries and English Translation, R.C. Majumdar, R. Basak, and N.B.
Banerji (eds), Rajashahi, 1939.
Ramāyaṇa of Vālmīki, The: An Epic of Ancient India, Critical Edition,
Bibliography 707
vols I–VI and VII forthcoming, R.P. Goldman (gen. ed.), Princeton,
1984–2008. See also below, Vālmīki Ramāyaṇa.
Ṛgveda, M. Müller (ed.), London, 1890.
Rhinoceros Horn and Other Early Buddhist Poems (Sutta-nipāta), The,
K.R. Norman (trans.), Oxford, 1996.
Rig-Veda, Der (German), K.F. Geldner (trans.), Cambridge, Massachu-
setts, 1951.
Saddharmapuṇḍarīka Sūtra, H. Kern and B. Nanjio (eds), St Petersburg,
1912.
Samantapāsādikā: Buddhaghoṣa’s Commentary on the Vinaya Piṭaka,
J. Takakusu and M. Nagai (eds), London, 1924.
Saṃyutta-nikāya, L. Freer (ed.), London 1984–1904; C.A.S. Rhys Davids
(trans.), The Book of Kindred Sayings, 1972 (rpnt.), London. Also see
above, Book of Kindred Sayings.
Śāṅkhāyana Gṛihyasūtra, H. Oldenberg (ed. and trans.), The Grihya-sūtras,
2 vols, Delhi, 1964 (rpnt).
Śāṅkhāyana Śrautasūtra, A. Hillebrandt (ed.), Calcutta, 1886–9.
Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, J. Eggeling (trans.), Delhi, 1972 (rpnt).
Śiva Purāṇa, A. Kunst and J.L. Shastri (ed.), Delhi, 1970.
Si-yu-ki: Buddhist Records of the Western World, S. Beal (ed. and trans.),
Delhi, 1969 (rpnt).
Skanda Purāṇa, G.V. Tagare and J.L. Shastri (trans. and annotated),
Delhi, 1993.
Somadevasūri, Nītivyākāmṛta, R. Malaviya (ed.), Varanasi, 1972.
Somaprabhācārya, Kumārapāla-prabandha-pratibodha, N.V. Vaidya (ed.),
Poona, 1956.
Śriviṣṇupurāṇa, Gorakhpur, 1970.
Sthavirāvalī / Pariśiṣṭaparvan of Hemachandra, H. Jacobi (ed.), Calcutta,
1932 (2nd edn).
Sumaṇgalavilāsinī, T.W. Rhys Davids and J.E. Carpenter (eds), London,
1886.
Sutta-nipāta, The, D. Andersen, and H. Smith (ed. and trans.), London,
1913.
Taittirīya Brāhmaṇa, R. Mitra (ed.), Calcutta, 1855–70.
Taittirīya Saṃhitā (2 vols), A.B. Keith (trans.), Delhi, 1967 (rpnt).
Tāranātha, History of Buddhism in India, D. Chattopadhyaya (ed.),
L. Chimpa and A. Chattopadhyaya (trans.), Simla, 1972; rpnt. Calcutta,
1980.
Triṣaṣṭiśalākāpuruṣacarita, H.M. Johnson (trans.), B. Bhattacharyya (ed.),
1931, Baroda.
708 Bibliography
Upaniṣads, in S. Radhakrishnan (ed.), The Thirteen Principal Upaniṣads,
London, 1953.
Vājasaneyī Saṃhitā, A. Weber (ed.), London, 1852.
Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa, The, 7 vols, Critical Edition, G.H. Bhatt and U.P. Shah
(gen. eds), Baroda, 1960–75. See also above, Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmīki.
Vaṃsatthappakāsinī / Mahāvaṃsa Ṭῑkā, G.P. Malalasekera (ed.), London,
1933.
Varāhamihira’s Bṛhatsaṃhitā, M.R Bhat and R.S. Sastri (trans. and ed.),
2 vols, Bangalore, 1947.
Vāyu Purāṇa, R. Mitra (ed.), Calcutta, 1880.
Vikramāṅkadevacarita, The, by Vidyāpati Bilhaṇa, G. Buhler (ed.),
Bombay, 1875.
Vinaya Piṭaka, 6 vols, I.B. Horner (trans.), Book of the Discipline, The,
London, 1938–66. Also see above, Book of the Discipline.
Vinaya Piṭakam, 5 vols, H. Oldenberg (ed.), London, 1879–83.
Vinaya Texts, T.W. Rhys Davids and H. Oldenberg, Oxford, 1881–5.
Vishnu Purāṇa, The, H.H. Wilson (trans. and ed.), London, 1840.
Viṣṇu Purāṇa, parts I-III, M.M. Pathak (ed.), Gorakhpur/Vadodara,
1967/1997.
Viṣṇu Purāṇa, part IV, Gorakhpur, 1970.
Yājñavalkyasmṛti, M.N. Dutt and K. Joshī (eds), Delhi, 2005.
Secondary Sources
Abrams, M., 1971, Natural Supernaturalism, New York.
Adikaram, E.W., 1946, Early History of Buddhism in Ceylon, Migoda.
Agashe, S., forthcoming, The Geography of the Ramayana.
Agrawala, V.S., 1950, “Catalogue of the Mathura Museum”, Journal of
the Uttar Pradesh Historical Society, 23, 36ff.
———, 1963, Matsya Purāṇa: A Study, Varanasi.
———, 1966, “Original Purāṇa Saṃhitā”, Purāṇa, 8, 2, 232–45.
Ahmad, A., 1992, In Theory: Classes, Nations, Literatures, London.
———, 1992, “Orientalism and After”, EPW, XLVI, 98–116.
Aiyer, S., 1922, “An Unidentified Territory of South India”, JRAS, 2,
161–75.
Ali, D., 2000, “Royal Eulogy as World History: Rethinking Copper-plate
Inscriptions in Cola India”, in R. Inden, et al. (eds), Querying the
Medieval: Texts and the History of Practices in South Asia, Delhi.
———, 2004, Courtly Culture and Political Life in Early Medieval India,
Cambridge.
Bibliography 709
Allaby, M. (ed.), 1985, The Oxford Dictionary of Natural History,
Oxford.
Allen, N., 1997, “And the Lake Drained Away”, in A.W. Macdonald (ed.),
Mandala and Landscape, Delhi.
Alsdorf, L., 1964, “The Ākhyāna Theory Reconsidered”, JOI (Baroda),
13, 3, 197ff.
Anderson, P., 1979, Lineages of the Absolutist State, London.
Antoine, R., 1975, Rama and the Bards: Epic Memory in the Ramayana,
Calcutta.
Apte, Vaman Shivaram, 1957–9, The Practical Sanskrit–English Dic-
tionary, Poona.
Aquil, R. and P. Chatterjee (eds), 2008, History in the Vernacular,
Delhi.
Asher, C.B., 1997, “Appropriating the Past: Jahangir”s Pillars”, Islamic
Culture, 71, 4, 8ff.
Atkinson, E.T., 1972 (rpnt), Himalayan Gazetteer, 1881–84, Delhi.
Avineri, S. (ed.), 1969, Karl Marx on Colonialism and Modernisation,
New York.
Awasthi, A.B.L., 1975, History from the Puranas, Lucknow.
Bagchi, J., 1993, The History and Culture of the Pālas of Bengal (c. 750 –
c. 1200), Delhi.
Bailey, G., 1997, “Intertextuality in the Purāṇas: A Neglected Element in
the Study of Sanskrit Literature”, in M. Brockington and P. Shreiner
(eds), Composing a Tradition: Concepts, Techniques and Relations,
Zagreb.
———, and M. Brockington, 2000, Epic Threads, New Delhi.
Bailey, H.W., 1959, “Iranian Arya and Daha”, Transactions of the Philo-
logical Society, 58, 71–115.
Bajpai, K.D., 1977, “Development of Jaina Art in Madhya Pradesh”, JIH,
December, LV, 89ff.
Bakhtin, M.M, 1986, The Dialogic Imagination, New Jersey.
Bakker, H.T. (ed.), 2004, The Vākaṭaka Heritage: Indian Culture at the
Crossroads, Groningen.
———, 2005, “Monuments to the Dead”, in D. Handa and R.K. Sharma
(eds), Revealing the Past, Delhi.
Balslev, N.A., 1983, A Study of Time in Indian Philosophy, Wiesbaden.
Barth, A., 1907, “The Inscription on the Piprahwa Vase”, Ind. Ant.,
XXXVI, 117–24.
Basham, A.L., 1961, “The Kashmir Chronicle”, in C.H. Philips (ed.),
Historians of India, Pakistan and Ceylon, London.
———, 1964, Studies in Indian History and Culture, Calcutta.
710 Bibliography
———, 1983, “The Mandasor Inscription of the Silk Weavers”, in B.L.
Smith (ed.), Essays on Gupta Culture, Delhi.
———, 1990, The Origins and Development of Classical Hinduism,
Delhi.
Beal, S., 1907, The Romantic Legend of Sakya Buddha, London.
Bechert, H., 1969–70, “Thervāda Buddhist Sangha: Some General Obser-
vations on Historical and Political Factors in its Development”, JAS,
29, 761–78.
———, 1977, William Geiger: His Life and Works, Colombo.
——— (ed.), 1991, The Dating of the Historical Buddha, vols I–II, Goet-
tingen.
Bentley, J., 1799, “Remarks on the Principal Eras and Dates of the Ancient
Hindus”, Asiatic Researches, 5, 315–93.
———, 1809, “On the Hindu System of Astronomy”, Asiatic Researches,
8, 195–244.
Bhandarkar, D.R., 1911, “Foreign Elements in the Hindu Population”,
Ind. Ant., 40, 24ff.
Bhargava, P.L., 1952/1956, India in the Vedic Age, Bombay/Lucknow.
Bhatnagar, V.S. (trans.), 1991, Padmanābha’s Kanhadade Prabandha:
India’s Greatest Patriotic Saga of Medieval Times, Delhi.
Bhatt, G.H., 1959–60, “On Vālmīki”, JOI (Baroda), 9, 1–4.
Biardeau, M., 1968, “Etude de Mythologique Hindoue”, BEFEO, 54,
19–45.
———, 1968, “Some More Considerations About Textual Criticism”,
Purāṇa, 10, 2, 115–23.
———, 1981, “The Salvation of the King in the Mahābhārata”, Contribu-
tions, 15, 1 and 2, 75–97.
Bloch, J., 1950/1955, Les Inscriptions d’Asoka, Paris.
Bohanan, L., 1952, “A Genealogical Charter”, AJIAI, 22, 301–15.
Bonazzoli, G., 1980, “Puranic Parampara”, Purāṇa, 22, 1, 33–60.
———, 1981, “Places of Puranic Recitation according to the Purāṇas”,
Purāṇa, 23, 1, 48–60.
———, 1983, “Composition, Transmission and Recitation of the
Purāṇas”, Purāṇa, 25, 2, 254–80.
———, 1983, “Remarks on the Nature of the Purāṇas”, Purāṇa, 25, 1,
77–113.
Bongard-Levin, G.M., 1971, “The Historicity of the Ancient Indian
Avadānas”, in G.M. Bongard-Levin (ed.), Studies in Ancient India
and Central Asia, Calcutta.
Bose, N.S., 1956, History of the Candellas of Jejakabhukti, Calcutta.
Bowra, C.M., 1957, Heroic Poetry, London.
Bibliography 711
Brandt, W.J., 1966, The Shape of Medieval History, New Haven.
Brarvig, J. and F. Liland, 2010, Traces of Gandharan Buddhism, Oslo.
Brockington, J., 1976, “Religious Attitudes in Vālmīki’s Rāmāyaṇa”,
JRAS, 2, 108–30.
———, 1984, Righteous Rāma, Delhi.
———, 1991, “Issues Involved in the Shift from Oral to Written Trans-
mission of the Epics: A Workshop Report”, in J. Brockington and
P. Schreiner (eds), Composing a Tradition: Concepts, Techniques and
Relationships, Zagreb.
———, 1998, The Sanskrit Epics, New Delhi.
———, 2002, “Jārasandha of Magadha, Mbh. 2.15–22”, in M. Brocking-
ton (ed.), Stages and Transitions, Zagreb.
Brocquet, S., 2010, La Geste de Rāma: poeme a double sens de
Sandhyākaranandin, Pondicherry.
Brodbeck, S.P., 2009, The Mahābhārata Patriline, Ashgate.
Brough, J., 1953, The Early Brahmanical System of Gotra and Pravara,
Cambridge.
Buhler, G., 1877, “Report on a Tour in Search of Sanskrit MSS in Kash-
mir”, JBBRAS, 38ff. (extra number).
———, 1892, “New Jaina Inscriptions from Mathura”, Ep. Ind., I, Cal-
cutta.
———, 1892, “Further Jaina Inscriptions from Mathura”, Ep. Ind., II,
Calcutta.
———, 1936, Life of the Jaina Monk Hemacandra, M. Patel (trans.),
Santiniketan.
Bulcke, C., 1950, Rāmakathā, Allahabad.
———, 1952–3, “The Genesis of the Bālakāṇḍa”, JOI (Baroda), 2,
327–31.
———, 1958–9, “About Materials for the Biography of Vālmīki, Author
of the First Rāmāyaṇa”, JOI (Baroda), 8, 3–19, 121–31, 346–8.
Burgess, J. and B. Indraji, 1976 (rpnt), Inscriptions from the Cave Temples
of Western India, ASWI, 10, 1881, Delhi.
Burke, P., 1969, The Renaissance Sense of the Past, London.
Burrow, T., 1965, The Sanskrit Language, London.
Burstein, S.M. (ed. and trans.), 1978, The Babylonica of Berossus,
Malibu.
Caland, W. (ed.), 1919, Das Jaiminīya Brāhmaṇa, Amsterdam.
Carr, E.H., 1986, What is History?, Basingstoke.
Chadwick, N.K., 1952, Poetry and Prophecy, Cambridge.
Chakrabarti, D.K., 1988, A History of Indian Archaeology from the Begin-
ning to 1947, Delhi.
712 Bibliography
Chakrabarti, K., 2001, Religious Process: The Purāṇas and the Making of
a Religious Tradition, Delhi.
———, forthcoming, “Brahmanical Hegemony and the Oppressed Social
Groups: The Kaivarta ‘Revolt’ and After”.
Chakravarti, U., 1988, The Social Dimensions of Early Buddhism,
Delhi.
———, 1989, “Whatever Happened to the Vedic Dāsī?”, in K. Sangari
and S. Vaid (eds), Recasting Women, Delhi.
Chamba, 1996, Gazetteer of the Chamba State, New Delhi.
Champakalakshmi R. and S. Gopal (eds), 1996, Tradition, Dissent and
Ideology, Delhi.
Chanana, D.R., 1963, The Spread of Agriculture in Northern India, New
Delhi.
Chandra, K.R., 1970, A Critical Study of Paumacariyam, Vaishali.
Chatterjee, P., 1993, The Nation and Its Fragments: Colonial and Post-
colonial Histories, New Jersey.
Chattopadhyaya, B.D., 1994, The Making of Early Medieval India,
Delhi.
——— (ed.), 2002, D.D. Kosambi: Combined Methods in Indology and
Other Writings, Delhi.
Chaudhuri, S.B., 1955, Ethnic Settlements in Ancient India: A Study of the
Puranic Lists of the Peoples of Bharatavarsa, Calcutta.
Chaudhury, R.K., 1964, Vratyas in Ancient India, Varanasi.
Chhabra, B. and G.S. Gai (eds), 1981, Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum,
vol. III. See also above, Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum.
Choudhury, G.C., 1954, Political History of Northern India from Jaina
Sources, c. 650 ad to 1300 ad, Amritsar.
Chowdhury, A.M., 1967, Dynastic History of Bengal, Dacca.
Church, C.D., 1974, “The Myth of the Four Yugas in the Sanskrit Puranas”,
Purāṇa, 16, 1, 5–25.
Cohn, B., 1987, An Anthropologist among the Historians and Other Essays,
Delhi.
Colie, R.L., 1973, The Resources of Kind: Genre-Theory in the Renais-
sance, Berkeley.
Collingwood, R.G., 1946, The Idea of History, Oxford.
Collins, S., 1982, Selfless Persons: Imagery and Thought in Thervāda
Buddhism, London.
———, 1992, “Notes on Some Oral Aspects of Pāli Literature”, IIJ, 35,
2–3, 121–36.
Conze, E., 1980, A Short History of Buddhism, London.
Bibliography 713
Coomaraswamy, A.K., c. 1940s (unpublished), “The Flood in Hindu Tradition”,
in R. Lipsey (ed.), Coomaraswamy, Selected Papers 2, Princeton,
1977.
Cornford, F.M., 1907, Thucydides Mythhistoricus, London.
Cort, J.E., 1995, “Genesis of Jaina History”, JIP, 23, 469–506.
———, 1998, “Who is King?”, in J.E. Cort (ed.), Open Boundaries, New
York.
Coulson, M., 2006 (rpnt), Rākṣasa’s Ring (trans.), New York.
Cousins, L.S., 1983, Buddhist Studies, London.
———, 1996, “The Dating of the Historical Buddha: A Review Article”,
JRAS, Series 3, 6, 1, 57–63.
Cumont, F., 1910, The Mysteries of Mithra, Chicago.
Cunningham, A., 1872–3 / 2000 (rpnt), ASR, “Report for the Year 1872–3”,
V, 145–75.
———, 1874–5 and 1876–7 / 2000 (rpnt), ASR, “Tours in Bundelkhand
and Malwa”, X, 98–9.
———, 1883–4 and 1884–5 / 2000 (rpnt), ASR, “A Tour in Bundelkhand
and Rewa 1883–84”, XXI, 171–4.
Dani, A.H., 1963, Indian Palaeography, Oxford.
Das Gupta, S.B., 1946, Obscure Religious Cults, Calcutta.
Davis, S., 1799, “On the Indian Cycle of Sixty Years”, Asiatic Researches,
5, 289ff.
de Certeau, M., 1988, The Writing of History, New York.
de Gobineau, J.A. Comte, 1853–5, Essai sur l’inegalite des races humaines,
Paris.
de Jong, J.W., 1968, Buddha’s Word in China, Canberra.
———, 1975, “Recent Russian Publications on the Indian Epic”, The
Adyar Library Bulletin, 39, 1–42.
———, 1976, A Brief History of Buddhist Studies in Europe and America,
Varanasi.
de la Vallee Poussin, L., 1976, The Buddhist Councils, Calcutta.
de Silva, K.M. (ed.), 1970, History of Ceylon, Colombo.
de Souza, J.P. and C.M. Kulkarni (eds), 1972, Historiography in Indian
Languages, Delhi.
Deeg, M., 2009, “From the Iron­wheel to Bodhisattvahood: Aśoka in
Buddhist Culture and Memory”, in P. Olivelle (ed.), Aśoka in History
and Historical Memory, Delhi.
Dehejia, V., 1997, Discourse in Early Buddhist Art, Delhi.
den Boer, W., 1968, “Greco-Roman Historiography in its Relation to
Biblical and Modern Thinking”, HT, 7, 60–75.
714 Bibliography
Desai, D., 1975, Erotic Sculpture of India: A Socio-Cultural Study, New
Delhi.
Deshpande, C.R., 1978, Transmission of the Mahabharata Tradition,
Simla.
Deshpande, M.M., 1978, “Genesis of Ṛgvedic Retroflexion: A Historical
and Sociolinguistic Investigation”, in M.M. Deshpande and P.E. Hook
(eds), Aryan and Non-Aryan in India, Ann Arbor.
Deshpande, P., 2007, Creative Pasts: Historical Memory and Identity in
Western India 1700–1960, Delhi.
Deva, K., 1959, “The Temples of Khajuraho in Central India”, Ancient
India, 15, 4–43.
Devahuti, D., 1998, Harsha: A Political Study, Delhi.
Devasthali, G.V., 1948, Introduction to the Study of the Mudraraksasa,
Bombay.
Deyell, J., 1990, Living Without Silver, Delhi.
Dhirasekera, J., 1979, “Texts and Traditions—Warped and Distorted”, in
Narada Felicitation Volume, Colombo.
Dikshit, R.K., 1977, Candellas of Jejakabhukti, New Delhi.
Dikshitar, V.R.R., 1933, Some Aspects of the Vāyu Purāṇa, Madras.
———, 1950, “The Age of Viṣṇu Purāṇa”, IHQ, 13, 46–50.
Dimock, E.C. and P.C. Gupta (eds), 1965, The Mahārāṣṭra Purāṇa, Hono-
lulu.
Dirks, N.B., 1987, The Hollow Crown, Cambridge.
———, 2001, Castes of Mind: Colonialism and the Making of Modern
India, Princeton.
du Perron, M. Anquetil, 1786, Recherches Historiques et Geographiques
sur l’Inde, vol. II, Berlin.
Dumezil, G., 1986, The Plight of a Sorcerer, Berkeley.
Dumville, D., 1977, “Kingship, Genealogies and Regnal Lists”, in P.H.
Sawyer and I.N. Woods (eds), Early Medieval Kingship, Leeds.
Dundas, P., 1992, The Jains, London.
Earle, T. (ed.), 1991, Chiefdoms: Power, Economy and Ideology, Cam-
bridge.
Eggermont, P.H.L., 1956, The Chronology of the Reign of Aśoka Moriya,
Leiden.
Eliade, M., 1957, “Time and Eternity in Indian Thought”, in J. Campbell
(ed.), Man and Time, Bollingen Series XXX.3, New York.
———, 1959, Cosmos and History: The Myth of the Eternal Return, New
York.
Eliot, H.M. and J. Dowson, 1996 (rpnt), History of India as Told by Its Own
Historians, vol. 1, Delhi.
Bibliography 715
Embree, A., 1962, Charles Grant and the Evangelicals, London.
Erdosy, G. (ed.), 1995, The Indo-Aryans of Ancient South Asia: Language,
Material Culture, Ethnicity, Berlin.
———, 1988, Urbanisation in Early Historical India, Oxford.
Errington, S., 1979, “Style in the Meaning of the Past”, JAS, 38, 2,
231–44.
Evans-Pritchard, E., 1940, The Nuer, Oxford.
Falk, H., 2006, Aśokan Sites and Artifacts, Mainz.
Fausboll, V., 1871, The Dasaratha-Jātaka, being the Buddhist Story of
King Rama, Copenhagen.
Fick, R., 1974 (rpnt), Social Conditions in North-eastern India during the
Buddha’s Time, Varanasi.
Filliozat, P., 1982, “The Afterdeath Destiny of the Hero According to
the Mahābhārata”, in S. Settar and G.D. Sontheimer (eds), Memorial
Stones, Dharwar.
Finley, M., 1983, Politics in the Ancient World, Cambridge.
Finnegan, R., 1977, Oral Poetry, Cambridge.
Fitzgerald, J.L., 1991, “India’s Fifth Veda: The Mahābhārata’s Presentation
of Itself”, in A. Sharma (ed.), Essays on the Mahābhārata, Leiden.
———, 2010, “No Contest between Memory and Invention”, in D. Kons-
tan and K.A. Raaflaub (eds), Epic and History, Chichester.
———, 2012, “History and Primordium in Ancient Indian Historical
Writing: Itihāsa and Purāṇa in the Mahābhārata and Beyond”, in
K.A. Raaflaub (ed.), Thinking, Recording and Writing History in the
Ancient World, Oxford.
Fleet, J.F., 1879, “The Cālukya­Vikrama Varsha, or Era of the Western
Cālukya King Vikramāditya VI”, Ind. Ant., 8, 187ff.
———, 1911, “The Kaliyuga Era of bc 3102”, JRAS, 43, 2, 479–96.
Flood, F.B., 2003, “Pillars, Palimpsests and Princely Practices”, Res, 43,
95–116.
———, 2009, Objects of Translation, Princeton.
Forbes, A.K., 1973 (rpnt), Ras Mala, Delhi.
Fortes, M., 1953, “The Structure of Unilineal Descent Groups”, American
Anthropologist, 55, 17–41.
Francke, A.H., 1972 (rpnt), Antiquities of Indian Tibet, New Delhi.
Freud, S., 1968 (rpnt), “Constructions in Analysis”, in idem, The Com-
plete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud (The Standard Edition,
24 vols), vol. 23, 255–70.
Frye, Northrop, 1957, Anatomy of Criticism, New Jersey.
Fuji, M., 1994, “On the Textual Formation of the Nīlamata Purāṇa”, in
Y. Ikari (ed.), A Study of the Nīlamata, Kyoto.
716 Bibliography
Funayama, T., 1994, “Remarks on Religious Predominance in Kash-
mir: Hindu or Buddhist”, in Y. Ikari (ed.), A Study of the Nīlamata,
Kyoto.
Furedi, F., 1992, Mythical Past, Elusive Future, London.
Fussman, G., 1989, “The Māṭ Devakula: A New Approach to its Under-
standing”, in D. Srinivasan (ed.), Mathura, New Delhi.
Fynes, R.C. (trans.), 1998, The Lives of the Jaina Elders, Oxford.
Gai, G.S., 1968–9, “Three Inscriptions of Rāma­Gupta”, JOI, XVIII,
247–51.
Gangoli, O.C., et al., 1957, The Art of the Candellas, Calcutta.
Gaur, R.C., 1974, “The Legend of Purūravas and Urvaśī: An Interpreta-
tion”, JRAS, 106, 2.
Geiger, W., 1908, The Dīpavamsa and Mahāvamsa, Colombo.
Gerth, H.H. and C. Wright Mills (eds), 1961, From Max Weber, London.
Ghose, N.N., 1965 (2ndedn), Indo-Aryan Literature and Culture, Vara-
nasi.
Ghoshal, U.N., 1942, “The Dynastic Chronicles of Kashmir”, IHQ, Cal-
cutta, XIX, 1–4, 27–38.
———, 1944, Beginnings of Indian Historiography and Other Essays,
Calcutta.
———, 1965, Studies in Indian History and Culture, Delhi.
Ghurye, K.G., 1950, Preservation of Learned Tradition in India, Bom-
bay.
Goetz, H., 1955, The Early Wooden Temples of Chamba, Leiden.
Gokhale, B.G., 1979, “On Buddhist Historiography”, in A.K. Narain (ed.),
Studies in Pali and Buddhism, Delhi.
Goldman, R.P., 1969, “Mortal Man and Immortal Woman”, JOI (Baroda),
18, 4, 273–303.
———, 1976, “Vālmīki and the Bhṛgu Connection”, JAOS, 96, 1, 69ff.
———, 1977, Gods, Priests and Warriors: The Bhṛgus of the Mahābhārata,
New York.
Gombrich, R., 1985, “The Vessantara Jātaka, the Rāmāyaṇa and the
Dasaratha Jātaka”, JAOS, 105, 427–37.
———, 1989, “Recovering the Buddha’s Message”, in T. Skorupski (ed.),
The Buddhist Forum, vol. I, London.
Gonda, J., 1975, “Gifts and Giving in the Rigveda”, Selected Studies,
vol. IV, Leiden.
———, 1975, Vedic Literature, Wiesbaden.
——— (ed.), 1973, History of Indian Literature, vol. III, Wiesbaden.
Gonzales-Reiman, L., 2002, The Mahābhārata and the Yugas, New
York.
Bibliography 717
———, 2006, “The Divinity of Rāma in the Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmīki”, JIP,
34, 203–20.
———, 2009, “Cosmic Cycles, Cosmology and Cosmography”, in K.A.
Jacobsen (ed.), Brill’s Encyclopaedia of Hinduism, vol. I, Leiden.
Goody, J. (ed.), 1968, Literacy in Traditional Societies, Cambridge.
——— and I. Watt, 1963, “The Consequences of Literacy”, CSSH, 5,
304–45.
Gopal, Sarvepalli (ed.), 1990, Anatomy of a Confrontation, Delhi.
Gough, K., 1961, Matrilineal Kinship, Berkeley.
Goyal, S., 1992, History and Historiography of the Age of Harṣa, Jodh-
pur.
———, 2007, “The Recently Discovered Kurukshetra–Varanasi Grant
of Harṣa: Year 23”, EW, 57, 1–4, 193–203.
———, 2009, Probings in Indian History, Jodhpur.
Goyal, S.R., 1967, A History of the Imperial Guptas, Allahabad.
———, 1986, Harṣa and Buddhism, Meerut.
Granoff, P., 1989, “Religious Biography and Clan History among
Śvetāmbara Jains in Northern India”, EW, 39, 1–4, 195–211.
———, 1992, “Worship as Commemoration”, BEI, 10, 181–202.
Grassman, H., 1976 (rpnt), Worterbuch zum Rigveda, vol. II, Wies-
baden.
Gregory, C.A., 1982, Gifts and Commodities, London.
Guenée, B., 1980, Historie et Culture Historique dans l’Occident Medi-
evale, Paris.
Guha, R., 1988, An Indian Historiography of India, Calcutta.
———, 2002, History at the Limit of World History, New York.
Guha, S., 2004, “Speaking Historically: The Changing Voices of Historical
Narratives in Western India 1400–1900”, AHR, 109, 4, 1084–1103.
Gunawardana, R.A.L.H., 1976, “The Analysis of Pre-colonial Social For-
mations in Asia in the Writings of Karl Marx”, IHR, 11, 2, 365–88.
———, 1976, “The Kinsmen of the Buddha: Myth and Political Charter
in the Ancient and Medieval Kingdoms in Sri Lanka”, SLJH, II, 1,
53–62.
———, 1979, Robe and Plough: Monasticism and Economic Interest in
Early Medieval Sri Lanka, Tucson.
———, 1988/1990, “Subtile Silks of Ferrous Firmness”, SLJH, XIV, 1
and 2, 1–59.
———, 2008, Periodisation in Sri Lankan History, Colombo.
Gupta, A.S., 1964, “Purāṇa, Itihāsa and Ākhyāna”, Purāṇa, VI, 2,
451ff.
Halbfass, W., 1988, India and Europe, Albany.
718 Bibliography
Hardy, F., 1993, “Information and Transformation—Two Faces of the
Purāṇas”, in W. Doniger (ed.), Purana Perrenis, New York.
Havale, S., 1946, The Pradhans of the Upper Narbada Valley, Bombay.
Hazra, R.C., 1940/1975 (rpnt), Studies in the Puranic Records of Hindu
Rites and Customs, Dacca /Delhi.
———, 1955, “The Aśvamedha, the Common Source of Origin of the
Purāṇa Pañca­lakṣana and the Mahābhārata”, ABORI, 36, 190–203.
———, 1958, Studies in the Upa-Puranas, Calcutta.
Heehs, P., 2003, “Shades of Orientalism: Paradoxes and Problems in
Indian Historiography”, HT, 42, 2, 169–95.
Heesterman, J.C., 1957, The Ancient Indian Royal Consecration, The
Hague.
———, 1985, The Inner Conflict of Tradition: Essays on Indian Ritual,
Kingship and Society, Chicago.
Hegel, G.W.F, 1857/1958, Lectures on the Philosophy of History, J. Sibree
(trans.), London/New York.
Hein, N., 1986, “Epic Sarvabhūtahite Rataḥ: A By­word of Non­Bhārgava
Editors”, ABORI, 67, 17–35.
Heine-Geldern, R., 1942, “Conceptions of State and Kingship in South
East Asia”, FEQ, 2, 1, 15–30.
Held, G., 1935, The Mahabharata: An Ethnological Study, London.
Henige, D.P., 1974, The Chronology of Oral Tradition, Oxford.
———, 1974, Oral Tradition and History, Oxford.
———, 1982, Oral Historiography, London.
Hettiarachchy, T., 1972, History of Kingship in Ceylon upto the Fourth
Century ad, Colombo.
Hiltebeitel, A., 1976, The Ritual of Battle, Ithaca.
———, 1997, Rethinking India’s Oral and Classical Epics, Chicago.
———, 2001, Rethinking the Mahābhārata, Chicago/Delhi.
———, 2005, “Buddhism and the Mahabharata”, in F. Squarcini (ed.),
Boundaries, Dynamics and Construction of Traditions in South Asia,
Firenze.
———, 2006, “Aśvaghoṣa’s Buddhacarita: The First Known Close
and Careful Reading of the Brahmanical Sanskrit Epics”, JIP, 34,
229–86.
Hindess, B. and P.Q. Hirst, 1975, Pre-Capitalist Modes of Production,
London.
Hobsbawm, E.J., 1972, “The Social Function of the Past: Some Ques-
tions”, P and P, 55, 3–18.
Hoffner, H.A., 1980, “History and Historians of the Ancient Near East:
The Hittites”, Orientalia, 49, 283–332.
Bibliography 719
Holt, J.C., 1991, Buddha in the Crown: Avalokiteśvara in the Buddhist
Tradition of Sri Lanka, New York.
Hopkins, E.W., 1887, The Social and Military Position of the Ruling Caste
in Ancient India as Represented in the Sanskrit Epic, JAOS, 13, 57ff.
———, 1920, The Great Epic of India, New Haven.
Horsch, P., 1966, Die Vedische Gāthā und Śloka Literateur, Bern.
Huang, C.C., 2007, “The Defining Characteristics of Chinese Historical
Thinking”, HT, 48, 180–8.
Huizinga, J., 1963, “A Definition of the Concept of History”, in R. Kliban-
sky and H.J. Paton (eds), Philosophy and History, New York.
Hultzsch, E., 1886, “Bhagalpur Plate of Narayanapāla”, Ind. Ant., 15,
304ff.
Huntington, C.W., Jr., 2007, “History, Traditions and Truth”, HR, 46, 3,
187–227.
Imam, Abu, 1966, Alexander Cunningham and the Beginnings of Indian
Archaeology, Dacca.
Inden, R., 1982, “Hierarchies of Kings in Medieval India”, in T.N. Madan
(ed.), Way of Life: King, Householder, Renouncer: Essays in Honour
of Louis Dumont, New Delhi.
———, 1986, “Orientalist Construction of India”, MAS, 20, 3, 401–46.
———, 1990, Imagining India, Oxford.
———, 2000, “Imperial Purāṇas: Kashmir as Vaiṣṇava Center of the
Words”, in R. Inden, et al. (eds), Querying the Medieval, Oxford.
Irwin, J., 1973, “Aśokan Pillars”, Burlington Magazine, 115, 706–7.
Jacobi, H., 1976 (rpnt), Das Rāmāyaṇa: Geschichte und Inhalt nebst
Concordans der gedruckten Recensionen, Bonn.
Jain, J.P., 2005, The Jaina Sources of the History of Ancient India,
Delhi.
Jaini, P.S., 1979, The Jaina Path of Purification, Berkeley.
———, 1984, “Mahābhārata Motifs in the Jaina Padma Purāṇa”, BSOAS,
47, 1, 108–15.
———, 1993, “Jaina Purāṇas: A Puranic Counter Tradition”, in W. Do-
niger (ed.), Purana Perennis, New York.
Jayanta, B., 2005, Much Ado About Religion, New York.
Jayaswal, K.P., 1934, An Imperial History of India, Lahore.
Jeganathan, P., 1995, “Authorizing History: Ordering Land: The Conquest
of Anuradhapura”, in P. Jeganathan and Q. Ismail (eds), Unmaking
the Nation: The Politics of Identity and History in Modern Sri Lanka,
Colombo.
Jha, D.N. (ed.), 2000, The Feudal Order, New Delhi.
720 Bibliography
Jha, V.N., 1970, “Varṇasaṃkara in the Dharmasūtras: Theory and Prac-
tice”, JESHO,13, III, 273–88.
Johnson, M.D., 1969, The Purpose of Biblical Genealogies, Cambridge.
Jones, D.H., 1970, “Problems of African Chronology”, JAH, 11, 161–
76.
Jones, W., 1788 (delivered in 1786), “Third Anniversary Discourse”,
Asiatic Researches, 2, 415ff.
———, 1788, “On the Gods of Greece, Italy and India”, Asiatic Re-
searches, 1, 221–75.
———, 1794, “On the Chronology of the Hindus”, Asiatic Researches,
2, 111–47.
———, 1799, “On the Mystical Poetry of the Persians and Hindus”,
Asiatic Researches, 5, 165–83.
Joshi, J.P., 1978, “Interlocking of Late Harappan Culture and PGW
Culture in the Light of Recent Excavations”, Man and Environment,
1, 100ff.
Joshi, M.C., 1979–80, “Ayodhya: Mythical and Real”, Puratattva, 11,
107–9.
Justin, 1896, Historiae Philippicae, quoted in J.W. McCrindle (trans.), The
Invasion of India by Alexander the Great, Westminster.
Kailasapathy, K., 1968, Tamil Heroic Poetry, Oxford.
Kane, P.V., 1935, “Gotra and Pravara in Vedic Literature”, JBBRAS (n.s.),
II, 1–17.
———, 1974 (2nd edn), History of Dharmasastras, vol. II, Poona.
Kantawala, S.G., 1964, Cultural History from the Matsya Purana,
Baroda.
Kantorowicz, E.H., 1957, The King’s Two Bodies, New Jersey.
Kantowsky, D., 1982, “Max Weber on India and Indian Interpretations of
Weber”, Contributions, 16 (n.s.), 141–74.
———, 1984, “Max Weber’s Contributions”, Contributions, 18 (n.s.),
307–17.
——— (ed.), 1986, Recent Research on Max Weber’s Studies on Hindu-
ism, Munich.
Kapoor, N. Sinha, 2005, “State Formation in Vidarbha: The Core of the
Eastern Vākāṭakas”, IHR, XXXII, 2, 13.
Karmakar, R.D., 1952, “The Pāriplava at the Aśvamedha”, ABORI, 33,
26–40.
Kashikar, C.G., 1968, A Survey of the Śrauta-sūtras, Bombay.
Keith, A.B, 1925, Religion and Philosophy of the Vedas and Upanisads,
Cambridge, Mass.
———, 1928, History of Sanskrit Literature, Oxford.
Bibliography 721
———, 1971 (rpnt), Ṛgveda Brahmanas, Delhi.
Kejariwal, O.P., 1988, The Asiatic Society of Bengal and the Discovery of
India’s Past, Delhi.
Kennedy, V., 1831, Researches into the Nature and Affinity of Ancient and
Hindu Mythology, London.
Kielhorn, F., 1888, “Four Rewah Copper-Plate Inscriptions”, Ind. Ant.,
XVII, 230–6.
———, 1896, “Ichchhavar Plates of Parmardideva”, Ind. Ant., XXV,
205–8.
King, R., 1999, Indian Philosophy, Edinburgh.
Kiparsky, P., 1976, “Oral Poetry: Some Linguistic and Typographical
Considerations”, in B.A. Stolz and R.S. Shanon (eds), Oral Literature
and the Formulae, Ann Arbor.
Kiribamune, S., 1978, “The Mahāvaṃsa: A Study of the Ancient His-
toriography of Sri Lanka”, in L. Prematilake, et al. (eds), Senerath
Paranavitana Commemoration Volume, Leiden.
———, 1979, “The Dīpavaṃsa in Ancient Sri Lankan Historiography”,
SLJH, V, 1 and 2, 89–100.
———, 1993, “Buddhist Historiography: Sri Lankan Perception”, in
S.A.I. Tirmizi (ed.), Cultural Interaction in South Asia: A Historical
Perspective, New Delhi.
———, 1995, “The State and Sangha in Pre-modern Sri Lanka”, Ethnic
Studies Report, XIII, 1, 47–76.
Kirk, G., 1965, Homer and the Epic, Cambridge.
Kosambi, D.D., 1956, An Introduction to the Study of Indian History,
Bombay.
———, 1956–7, “Origins of Feudalism in Kashmir”, JBBRAS, 31–2,
108–20.
———, 1962, Myth and Reality, Bombay.
———, 1964, “The Autochthonous Element in the Mahābhārata”, JAOS,
84, 31–44.
———, 1965, The Culture and Civilisation of Ancient India in Historical
Outline, London.
———, 1969, Ancient India: A History of its Culture and Civilisation,
New York.
———, 2009, “Early Brahmins and Brahminism”, in B.D. Chattopadhyaya
(ed.), D.D. Kosambi: Combined Methods in Indology and Other Writ-
ings, Delhi.
———, 2009, “On the Origin of Brahmana Gotras”, in B.D. Chattopad-
hyaya (ed.), D.D. Kosambi: Combined Methods in Indology and Other
Writings, Delhi.
722 Bibliography
Koskikallio, P. (ed.), 2009, Parallels and Comparisons, Zagreb.
Krader, L., 1975, The Asiatic Mode of Production, Assen.
Kuiper, F.B.J., 1991, Aryans in the R̥gveda, Amsterdam.
Kulkarni, V.M., 1960–1, “Origin and Development of the Rama Story in
Jaina Literature”, JOI (Baroda), IX, 2, 189–204.
———, 1990, The Story of Rama in Jaina Literature, Ahmedabad.
Kulke, H., 1979, “Geshicteschreibung und Geshictesbild in Hinduistechen
Mittelalter”, Saeculum, 30, 100–13.
——— (ed.), 1995, The State in India, 1000–1700, Delhi.
———, 2001, “Historiography in Early Medieval India”, in G. Berkemer,
et al. (eds), Explorations in the History of South Asia: In Honour of
Dietmar Rothermund, Delhi, 71–83.
———, 2001, Kings and Cults: State Formation and Legitimation in India
and South Asia, Delhi.
Kumari, V., 1968, The Nīlamata Purāṇa, Jammu.
Lad, G., 1983, Mahābhārata and Archaeological Evidence, Poona.
Lahiry, S.P., 1955, “Bhaturiya Inscription of Rājyapāla”, IHQ, 31,
215–31.
Lal, B.B., 1954–5, “Excavation at Hastinapur and Other Explorations in
the Upper Ganga and Sutlej Basins”, Ancient India, 10 and 11, 4ff.
———, 1978–9, “Was Ayodhya a Mythical City?”, Puratattva, 10,
45–9.
———, 1981, “The Two Indian Epics vis-à-vis Archaeology”, Antiquity,
LV, 27–34.
———, 1988, “Historicity of the Mahabharata and the Ramayana: What
has Archaeology to Say in the Matter”, paper presented at the Inter-
national Seminar on New Archaeology and India, Indian Council of
Historical Research, New Delhi.
Lal, V., 2003, The History of History: Politics and Scholarship in Modern
India, Delhi.
Lambert, W.G. and A.R. Millard, 1969, Atra-hasis, Oxford.
Lamotte, E., 1958, Histoire du Bouddhisme Indien; Sara Webb-Boin
(trans.), 1988, History of Indian Buddhism, Louvain.
Lassen, C., 1858–74, Indische Alterthumskunde, vol. I, Leipzig.
Law, B.C., 1930, A Study of the Mahāvastu, Calcutta.
———, 1941, A Manual of Buddhist Historical Tradition, Calcutta.
———, 1946, Buddhaghoṣa, JBBRAS, Monograph 1, Bombay.
Leach, E., 1990, “Aryan Invasions over Four Millennia”, in E. Ohnuki-
Tierney (ed.), Culture Through Time, Stanford.
Leelashantakumari, S., 1986, History of the Agraharas: Karnataka,
400–1300, Madras.
Bibliography 723
Lefeber, R., 1990, “The Minister Cāṇakya, from the Pariśiṣṭaparvan of
Hemacandra”, in P. Granoff (ed.), The Clever Adulteress and Other
Stories: A Treasury of Jaina Literature, Oakville.
LeGoff, J. and P. Nora (eds), 1985, Constructing the Past, Cambridge.
Levi, S., 1923, “Deux nouveaux traits de dramaturgie Indienne”, Journal
Asiatique, CCIII, 193–218.
Levitt, S.H., 1976, “A Note on the Compound Pañcalakṣaṇa in
Amarasiṅha’s Nāmalingānuśasāna”, Purāṇa, 18, 1, 5–38.
Lewalski, B.K., 1985, Milton’s Paradise Lost and the Rhetoric of Literary
Forms, Princeton.
———, 1986, Renaissance Genres: Essays in Theory, History and Inter-
pretation, Cambridge (Mass.).
Ling, T., 1973, The Buddha, London.
Lingat, R., 1989, Royautes Bouddhiques, Paris.
Lord, A.B., 1960, The Singer of Tales, Cambridge (Mass.).
Lorenzen, D.N., 1972, The Kāpālikas and Kālāmukhas, Delhi.
———, 1982, “Imperialism and the Historiography of Ancient India”, in
S.N. Mukherjee (ed.), India—History and Thought: Essays in Honour
of A.L. Basham, Calcutta.
MacDonell, A.A., 1900, History of Sanskrit Literature, London.
—— and A.B. Keith, 1967 (rpnt), The Vedic Index, vols I and II, Delhi.
Mahadevam, I., 2003, Early Tamil Epigraphy from the Earliest Times to
the Sixth Century ad, Cambridge (Mass.).
Majeed, J., 1992, Ungoverned Imaginings, Oxford.
Majumdar, R.C., 1935, “The Revolt of Divokka against Mahipāla II and
Other Revolts in Bengal”, Dacca University Studies, 1, 2, 125ff.
———, 1943, History of Bengal, vol. I, Dacca.
———, 1961, “Ideas of History in Sanskrit Literature”, in C.H. Philips
(ed.), Historians of India, Pakistan, and Ceylon, London, 13–28.
—— and A.S. Altekar (eds), 1946, New History of the Indian People,
vol. VI, Lahore.
Malalasekera, G.P., 1958, The Pali Literature of Ceylon, Colombo.
———, 1960, Dictionary of Pali Proper Names, London.
Malamoud, C., 1996, Cooking the World, Delhi.
Malinar, A., 2007, The Bhāgavad Gītā: Doctrines and Contexts, Cam-
bridge.
Marshall, J., 1915, “Excavations at Bhīṭa”, ASIAR 1911–12, Calcutta,
44–60.
Marx, K., 1975 (rpnt), “The Future Results of British Rule in India”, in
Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels: Collected Works, vol. 12, 217–22.
724 Bibliography
Matilal, B.K., 1989, Moral Dilemmas in the Mahabharata, Shimla.
———, 1999, The Character of Logic in India, Delhi.
Mauss, M. (trans.), 1954, The Gift, London.
McCrindle, J.W., 1892, The Invasion of India by Alexander the Great,
Westminster.
Mehendale, A., 1973, “The Puranas”, in R.C. Majumdar (ed.), The History
and Culture of the Indian People, Vol. III: The Classical Age, Bom-
bay.
———, 1988, Review of “Yardi, M.R., 1986, The Māhabhārata: Its
Genesis and Growth”, ABORI, 69, 349–55.
Meisami, J.S., 1999, Persian Historiography to the End of the Twelfth
Century, Edinburgh.
Mendis, G.C., 1996, The Pali Chronicles of Ceylon, Colombo.
Mill, J., 1817, The History of British India, London.
Miller, B. Stoler, 1971, Phantasies of a Love Thief, New York.
Minkowski, C.Z., 1989, “Janamejaya’s Sattra and Ritual Structure”, JAOS,
109, 3, 401–20.
———, 1991, “Snakes, Sattras and the Mahābhārata”, in A. Sharma (ed.),
Essays on the Mahabharata, Delhi.
Mitchiner, J.E., 1978, “The Evolution of the Manvantara Theory as Illus-
trated by the Saptaṛśi Manvantara Traditions”, Purāṇa, 20, 1, 7–37.
———, 1986, The Yuga Purāṇa, Calcutta.
Mitra, R.L., 1874, “Note on Palam Baoli Inscription of Delhi”, JASB,
43, 1, 104–10.
Mitra, S.K., 1958, The Early Rulers of Khajuraho, Calcutta.
Mohan, K., 1981, Early Medieval History of Kashmir, New Delhi.
Momigliano, A., 1958, “The Place of Herodotus in the History of Historio-
graphy”, History, 43, 1–13.
———, 1963, “Christianity and the Decline of the Roman Empire”, in A.
Momigliano (ed.), The Conflict between Paganism and Christianity in
the Fourth Century, Oxford.
———, 1974, “Polybius and Posidonius”, Historicism Revisited, MKN,
Akademie van Wetenschappen, Aftd. Letterkunde, Nieuwe Reeks,
Decl., 37, 3, 63–70.
———, 1975, Alien Wisdom: The Limits of Hellenisation, Cambridge.
———, 1978, “Greek Historiography”, HT, 17, 1, 1–23.
———, 1981, “History and Biography”, in M. Finley (ed.), Legacy of
the Greeks, Oxford.
———, 1990, The Classical Foundations of Modern Historiography,
Berkeley.
Bibliography 725
———, 1993 (revised edn), The Development of Greek Biography, Cam-
bridge (Mass.).
Monier Williams, M., 1863, Indian Epic Poetry, London.
Morris, I., 1986, “The Use and Abuse of Homer”, Classical Antiquity,
5, 1, 81–138.
Morris, R. (ed.), 1882, The Buddhavaṃsa and the Cariya-piṭaka, B.C.
Law (trans.), 1938, London.
Morrison, B.M., 1970, Political Centres and Culture Regions in Early
Bengal, Tucson.
Morton-Smith, R., 1973, Dates and Dynasties in Earliest India, Delhi.
Mughal, M.R., 1997, Ancient Cholistan, Lahore.
Mukherjee, S.N., 1968, Sir William Jones: A Study in Eighteenth Century
British Attitudes to India, Cambridge.
Müller, M., 1859, A History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, London.
———, 1868, Chips from a German Workshop, vol. I, London.
———, 1883, India: What Can it Teach Us?, London.
Munshi, S., 1988, “Max Weber on India: An Introductory Critique”,
Contributions, 22, 1, 1–30.
Murthy, S.S.N., 2003, “The Questionable Historicity of the Mahābhārata,
EJVS, 10, 5, 1–15.
Murti, T.V.R., 1960, The Central Philosophy of Buddhism, London.
Mus, P., 1935, Barabudur: Esquisse d’une Histoire du Bouddhisme fondee
sur la Critique Archaeologique des texts, 2 vols, Hanoi.
Nakamura, H., 1957, “The Influence of Confucian Ethics on the Chi-
nese Translation of Buddhist Sutras”, Sino-Indian Studies, 5, 3–4,
156–70.
———, 1989 (rpnt), Indian Buddhism, Delhi.
Nandy, A., 1995, “History’s Forgotten Doubles”, HT, 34, 2, 44–66.
Nanyaura Plate A of Dhaṅga, 1887, Ind. Ant., XVI, 201–4.
Narayanan, M.G.S., 1969/1972, “Mūṣakavamśa­kāvya of Atula”, Proceed-
ings of the All India Orientalist Congress, Calcutta/Poona.
Nora, P., 1989, “Between Memory and History: Les Lieux de Memoire”,
Representations, 26, 7–24.
Norman, K.R., 1983, Pali Literature, Wiesbaden.
O’Leary, B., 1995, The Asiatic Mode of Production, London.
Oberoi, H., 1994, The Construction of Religious Boundaries: Culture,
Identity, and Diversity in the Sikh Tradition, Chicago.
Obeyesekere, G., 1991, “Myth, History and Numerology in the Buddhist
Chronicles”, in H. Bechert (ed.), The Dating of the Historical Buddha,
vol. I, Goettingen.
726 Bibliography
Ohira, S., 1994, A Study of the Bhagvatīsutra: A Chronological Analysis,
Ahmedabad.
Ohri, V.C. (ed.), 1989, History and Culture of the Chamba State, New
Delhi.
———, 1991, Sculpture of the Western Himalayas: History and Stylistic
Development, Delhi.
Oliver, R.T., 1971, Communication and Culture in Ancient India and
China, Syracuse.
Ong, W.J., 1982, Orality and Literacy, London.
Pai, M.G. and S.K. Manjeshwar, 1960, “The Word Vṛṣala in Mudāarākṣasa”,
in H.L. Hariyappa and M.M. Patkar (eds), Professor P.K. Gode Com-
memoration Volume, Poona.
Pande, G.C., 1974 (2nd edn), Studies in the Origin of Buddhism, Delhi.
Pandia, M.V. and S.S. Das (eds), 1904–13, The Pṛthvīrāja Rāsau of Chand
Bardai (Nagari Pracharani Granthamala Series), nos 4–22, Benaras.
Pandit, R.S. (ed.), 1944, Viśākhadatta’s Mudrārākṣasa or The Signet Ring,
Bombay.
Pargiter, F.E., 1910, “Ancient Indian Genealogies and Chronology”, JRAS,
1–56.
———, 1914, “Earliest Indian Traditional History”, JRAS, s. 3, 265–95;
741–45.
———, 1922, Ancient Indian Historical Tradition, London.
———, 1975 (rpnt), The Purana Text of the Dynasties of the Kali Age,
Delhi.
Parpola, A., 1994, Deciphering the Indus Script, Cambridge.
Parry, A. (ed.), 1971, The Making of Homeric Verse: The Collected Papers
of Milman Parry, Oxford.
Patel, M., 1961, Die Dānastutis des Rigveda, B.H. Kapadia (trans.), The
Danastutis of the Rig Veda, Vallabha Vidyanagar.
Pathak, V.S., 1966, Ancient Historians of India, Bombay.
Patil, D.R., 1946, Cultural History from Vayu Purana, Poona.
Patvardhan, M.V., 1964–5, “Pañcajana”, JBBRAS, 39–40, 169–82.
Perera, L.S., 1961, “The Pali Chronicles of Ceylon”, in C.H. Philips (ed.),
Historians of India, Pakistan and Ceylon, London.
———, 2001, The Institutions of Ancient Ceylon from Inscriptions, Vol.
I: 3rd cent. bc to 830 ad, Kandy.
Petech, L., 1939, A Study of the Chronicles of Ladakh, Calcutta.
Peters, E., 1960, “The Proliferation of Segments in the Lineage of the
Bedouin of Cyrenaica”, JRAIGBI, 90, 29–53.
Philips, C.H. (ed.), 1961, Historians of India, Pakistan and Ceylon,
London.
Bibliography 727
Pingree, D., 1963, “Astronomy and Astrology in India and Iran”, Isis,
54, 229–40.
———, 1990, “The Purāṇas and Jyotiḥśāstra: Astronomy”, JAOS, 110,
2, 274–80.
Plutarch, 1919, Life of Alexander, London; selections in J.W. McCrindle
(trans.), 1896, The Invasion of India by Alexander the Great, West-
minster.
Poliokov, L., 1974, The Aryan Myth, New York.
Pollock, S., 1989, “Mīmāṃsā and the Problem of History in Traditional
India”, JAOS, 109, 4, 603–10.
———, 1993, “Rāmāyaṇa and Political Imagination in India”, JAS, 52,
2, 261–97.
———, 1996, “The Sanskrit Cosmopolis, 300–1300 CE : Transcul-
turation, Vernacularisation, and the Question of Ideology”, in J.E.M.
Houben (ed.), Ideology and Status of Sanskrit: Contributions to the
History of the Sanskrit Language, New York.
———, 1998, “The Cosmopolitan Vernacular”, JAS, 57, 1, 6–37.
———, 2007, The Language of the Gods in the World of Men, Delhi.
———, et al., 2007, “Debate on Textures of Time”, HT, 46, 364–426.
Pradhan, S.N., 1927, Chronology of Ancient India, Calcutta.
Prasad, P., 1990, Sanskrit Inscriptions of Delhi Sultanate 1191–1526,
Delhi.
Press, G.A., 1977, “History of the Development of the Idea of History in
Antiquity”, HT, 16, 280–96.
Propp, V., 1968, The Morphology of the Folktale (trans.), Austin.
———, 1984, Theory and History of Folklore (trans.), Minneapolis.
Przyluski, J., 1923, La Legende de l’Empereur Asoka, Paris.
Pusalker, A.D. (ed.), 1952, History and Culture of the Indian People,
Vol. I: The Vedic Age, Bombay.
———, 1958, Studies in the Epics and Purāṇas, Bombay.
Raaflaub, K.A., 2005, “Epic and History”, in J.M. Foley (ed.), A Compa-
nion to Ancient Epic, Malden.
——— (ed.), 2012, Thinking, Recording and Writing History in the Ancient
World, Oxford.
Raeside, I.M.P., 1992, “A Gujarati Bardic Poem: The Kanhadade Pra-
bandha”, in C. Shackle and R. Snell (eds), The Indian Narrative:
Perspectives and Patterns, Wiesbaden.
Raghavan, V., 1948, The Mudrārākṣasa of Mahādeva, Tanjore.
Rahurkar, V.G., 1960, “Devāpi and Śantanu in the Ṛg Veda”, in H.L.
Hatiyappa, and M.M. Patkar (eds), P.K. Gode Commemoration Vol-
ume, pt III, Poona.
728 Bibliography
Rangachari, D., 2009, Invisible Women, Visible Histories, Delhi.
Rank, Otto, 1959, The Myth of the Birth of the Hero, New York.
Rao, G., 1920, “Extracts from the Mushika-vamsam”, in Travancore
Archaeological Series, II.1.10, 87–113.
Rao, V. Narayana, 1993, “Purāṇa as Brahminic Ideology”, in W. Doniger
(ed.), Purana Perennis, New York.
———, Sanjay Subrahmanyam, and David Shulman, 2000, Textures of
Time: Writing History in South India 1600–1800, Delhi.
Rapson, E.J. (ed.), 1922, The Cambridge History of India, vol. I, Cam-
bridge.
Rau, W., 1973, “The Meaning of Pur in Vedic Literature”, Abhandlungen
der Marburger Gelehrten Geselleschaft, III.I, Munich.
Ray, H.C., 1931–6, Dynastic History of Northern India, 2 vols, Calcutta.
Ray, N., 1994, History of the Bengali People (Ancient Period), Delhi.
Raychaudhuri, H.C., 1923, Political History of Ancient India, Calcutta.
Redfield, J., 1975, Nature and Culture in the Iliad: The Tragedy of Hector,
Chicago.
Renan, E., 1890, “L’avenir de la Science”, Ouvres, III, 728ff.
Renou, L., 1956, Études Vediques et Paninéennes, Paris.
———, 1965, The Destiny of the Veda (trans.), Delhi.
Rewa Grants of 1240–1, 1888, Ind. Ant., XVII, 230–6.
Rhys Davids, T.W., 1963 (rpnt), The Questions of King Milinda, New
York.
—— and C.A.F. Rhys Davids, 1973 (rpnt) Buddhist Birth Stories,
Delhi.
Risley, H., 1908, The People of India, London.
Rocher, L., 1986, The Purāṇas, Wiesbaden.
Rosenfield, J.M., 1967, The Dynastic Arts of the Kushans, Berkeley.
Rosenthal, F., 1970, Ibn Khaldun: The Muqaddimah, Princeton.
Roth, G., 2004, “Ayodhyā and Ganga”, in H.W. Bodewitz and Minoru
Hara (eds), Gedenkschrift J.W. de Jong, Tokyo.
Roy, K., 1988, “Women and Men Donors at Sanchi: A Study in Inscrip-
tional Evidence”, in L.K. Tripathi (ed.), Position and Status of Women
in Ancient India, Varanasi.
Roy, S.N., 1972, “Textual and Historical Analysis of the Puranic Chronol-
ogy Relating to the Maurya Dynasty”, Purāṇa, 14, 2, 94–106.
Ruesen, J., 2002, Western Historical Thinking, Oxford.
Rufus, Q.C., 1896, History of Alexander the Great; selections in J.W.
McCrindle (trans.), The Invasion of India by Alexander the Great,
Westminster.
Sahlins, M.D., 1961, “The Segmentary Lineage: An Organisation of Preda-
tory Expansion”, American Anthropologist, 63, 2, 332–45.
Bibliography 729
———, 1985, Islands of History, Chicago.
Said, E., 1978, Orientalism, London.
Salomon, R., 1998, Indian Epigraphy, Austin.
———, 2009, “The Fine Art of Forgery”, in G. Colas and G. Gersch-
heimer (eds), Écrire et Transmettre en Inde Classique, Paris.
Sanderson, A., 2004, “Religion and the State: Śaiva Officiants in the Terri­
tory of the King’s Brahmanical Chaplain”, IIJ, 47, 229–300.
Sankalia, H.D., 1982, Ramayana: Myth or Reality, New Delhi.
Sarukkai, S., 2008, Indian Philosophy and the Philosophy of Science,
New Delhi.
Sastri, H., 1942, “Nalanda and its Epigraphic Material”, MASI, no. 66,
49–53.
Schopen, G., 1997, Bones, Stones and Buddhist Monks, Honolulu.
———, 2004, Buddhist Monks and Business Matters, Honolulu.
Schwab, R., 1950, La Renaissance Orientale, Paris.
Selvanayagam, I., 1992, “Aśoka and Arjuna as Counter­figures Standing
on the Field of Dharma: A Historical-Hermeneutical Perspective”,
HR, 32, 1, 59–75.
Sen, K.C., 1923, Keshab Chandra Sen’s Lectures in India, Calcutta.
Sen, N., 1966, “Comparative Studies in Oral Epic Poetry and the Vālmīki
Rāmāyaṇa: A Report on the Bālakāṇḍa”, JAOS, 86, 397–409.
Sen, S.P., 1970, Sources for the History of India, Calcutta.
Seneviratne, H.L., 1999, The Work of Kings, Chicago.
Seneviratne, S., 1984, “The Archaeology of the Megalithic—Black and
Red Ware Complex in Sri Lanka”, Ancient Ceylon, no. 5, 237–307.
———, 1996, “Peripheral Regions and Marginal Communities: Towards
an Alternative Explanation of Early Iron Age Material and Social
formations in Sri Lanka”, in R. Champakalakshmi and S. Gopal (eds),
Tradition, Dissent and Ideology, 266–70.
Settar, S. and G.D. Sontheimer (eds), 1982, Memorial Stones, Dharwar.
Shah, A.M., and R.G. Shroff, 1959, “The Vahivanca Barots of Gujarat:
A Caste of Genealogists and Mythographers”, in M. Singer (ed.),
Traditional India, Chicago.
Shah, K.K., 1986, “Economic Revolution in Early Medieval Bundelkhand”,
Punjab University Research Bulletin (Arts), 17, 2, 167–74.
———, 1987, “Social Structure in Candella Grants”, JESI, 14, 28–34.
———, 1988, Ancient Bundelkhand, Delhi.
———, 1993, “Self-Legitimation and Social Primacy: A Case Study of
Some Kayastha Inscriptions from Central India”, Proceedings of the
Indian History Congress, no. 54, Mysore, 857–66.
———, 2001, The Problem of Identity: Women in Early Indian Inscrip-
tions, Delhi.
730 Bibliography
Shah, U.P. and M.A. Dhaky (eds), 1975, Aspects of Jaina Art and Archi-
tecture, Ahmedabad.
Sharma, A. (ed.), 1991 (rpnt)., Essays on the Mahabharata, Delhi.
———, 2003, Hinduism and its Sense of History, New Delhi.
Sharma, B.R., 1959, “The Pañca­janas in the Vedas”, JBBRAS (n.s.), 31
and 32, 244–64.
Sharma, M., 2004, “State Formation and Cultural Complex in Western
Himalaya: Chamba, Genealogy and Epigraphs 700–1650 CE”, IESHR,
41, 387–432.
———, 2006, “Contested Claims: Land, Ritual and the Jogis of
Charpaṭnath” (New Documents from Chamba), IESHR, 43,4,
488–510.
Sharma, R.S., 1965/1980, Indian Feudalism, Calcutta/Delhi.
———, 2001, Early Medieval Indian Society, Delhi.
Shastri, A.M., 1998, The Sātavāhanas and the Western Kṣatrapas, Nag-
pur.
Shende, N.J., 1943, “The Authorship of the Māhabhārata”, ABORI, 24,
67–82.
———, 1943, “The Authorship of the Rāmāyaṇa”, JUB, 12 (n.s.), 2,
19–24.
Shokoohy, M., 1988, “Haryana I: The Column of Firuz Shah and Other
Islamic Inscriptions from the District of Hissar”, Corpus Inscriptio-
num Iranicum, part IV: Persian Inscriptions down to the Early Safavid
Period, vol. XLVII, India, State of Haryana, London.
Siegal, J., 1979, Shadow and Sound: The Historical Thought of a Sumatran
People, Chicago.
Silk, J., 2008, “Incestuous Ancestors: The Family Origins of Gautama Sid-
dhartha, Abraham and Sarah in Genesis 20.12”, HR, 47, 4, 253–81.
Singh, K.S. (ed.), 1993, The People of India, Delhi.
Singh, M.R., 1972, Geographical Data in the Early Puranas, Calcutta.
Sircar, D.C., 1957, “Some Performers of Aśvamedha”, in K.K. Pillai, et al.
(eds), Professor P.S. Pillai Commemoration Volume, Madras.
———, 1965, Indian Epigraphy, Calcutta.
———, 1965 (2nd edn), Select Inscriptions, Calcutta.
——— (ed.), 1969, The Bharata War and Puranic Genealogies, Cal-
cutta.
———, 1969, “Myth of the Great Bharata War”, in D.C. Sircar (ed.), The
Bharata War and Puranic Genealogies, Calcutta.
———, 1969, Problems of Kushana and Rajput History, Calcutta.
———, 1971 (rpnt), Studies in the Geography of Ancient and Medieval
India, Delhi.
Bibliography 731
———, 1974, Studies in Yugapurāṇa and Other Texts, Delhi.
———, 1977, Early Indian Epigraphical and Numismatic Studies, Cal-
cutta.
Slaje, W., 2005, “A Note on the Genesis and Character of Śrivara’s
So-Called Jaina-Rājataraṅgiṇī”, JAOS, 125, 3, 379–88.
———, 2008, “In the Guise of Poetry—Kalhaṇa Reconsidered”, in
W. Slaje, (ed.), Śāstrārambha: Inquiries into the Preamble in Sanskrit,
Wiesbaden.
Smith, B.L. (ed.), 1978, Religion and the Legitimation of Power in Sri Lanka,
Chambersberg.
Smith, M.C., 1975, “The Mahābhārata’s Core”, JOAS, 95, 479–82.
Smith, V., 1902, “Andhra History and Coinage”, ZDMG, 56, 649–75.
———, 1924, The Early History of India, Oxford.
Southern, R.W., 1970, “Aspects of the European Tradition of Historical
Writing”, Transactions of the Royal Historical Society, 20, 173–96;
continued in 1971, 21, 159–79; 1972, 22, 159–80; 1973, 23, 243–63.
Spiegel, G.M., 1997, The Past as Text, Baltimore.
Speiser, E.A., 1964, Genesis, New York.
Srimali, K.M., 1987, Agrarian Structure in Central India and the North-
ern Deccan (c. ad 300–500), A Study of Vākāṭaka Inscriptions, New
Delhi.
Staal, J.F., 1961, Nambudri Vedic Recitation, The Hague.
———, 1989, “The Independence of Rationality from Literacy”, Europ-
ean Journal of Sociology, 30, 301–10.
———, 2008, Discovering the Vedas: Origins, Mantras, Rituals, Insights,
Delhi.
Stein, B., 1969, “Early Indian Historiography: A Conspiracy Hypothesis”,
IESHR, 6, 1, 41–60.
———, 1977, “The Segmentary State in South Indian History”, in R.G.
Fox (ed.), Realm and Region in Traditional India, New Delhi.
Stevenson, S., 1970 (rpnt), The Heart of Jainism, New Delhi.
Stolz, B.A. and R.S. Shanon (eds), 1976, Oral Literature and the Formulae,
Ann Arbor.
Strong, J., 1983, The Legend of King Aśoka, New Jersey.
Sukthankar, V.S., 1936–7, “The Bhṛgus and the Bhārata: A Text­Historical
Study”, ABORI, 18, 1–76.
———, 1957, On the Meaning of the Mahābhārata, Bombay.
Sullivan, B.M., 1990, Krishna Dvaipayana Vyasa and the Mahabharata:
A New Interpretation, Leiden.
———, 1999, Seer of the Fifth Veda, Delhi.
732 Bibliography
Sumitra Bai, B.N. and R.J. Zydenbos, 1991, “The Jaina Mahābhārata”, in
A. Sharma (ed.), Essays on the Mahabharata, Delhi.
Sutton, N., 1997, “Aśoka and Yudhiṣṭhira: A Historical Setting for the
Tensions in the Mahābhārata”, Religion, 27, 4, 331–41.
Tessitori, L.P., 1914, 1919, 1920, “A Scheme for the Bardic and His-
torical Survey of Rajputana”, JASB (n.s.), 10, 373–86; 15, 5–79; 16,
251–79.
———, 1917, “Bardic and Historical Survey of Rajputana: A Descriptive
Catalogue of Bardic and Historical Manuscripts”, in L.P. Tessitori
(ed.) Bibliotheca Indica: A Collection of Oriental Works, Calcutta.
Thapar, R., 1978, Exile and the Kingdom: Some Thoughts on the Rāmā-
yaṇa, Bangalore.
———, 1978/2010 (2nd edn), Ancient Indian Social History: Some Inter-
pre tations, New Delhi.
———, 1981, “Death and the Hero”, in S.C. Humphreys and H. King
(eds), Mortality and Immortality: The Anthropology and Archaeology
of Death, London.
———, 1982, “The Ramayana: Theme and Variation”, in S.N. Mukherjee
(ed.), India: History and Thought, Calcutta.
———, 1983, “The Archaeological Background to the Agnicayana”, in
F. Staal (ed.), Agni, II, Berkeley; rpnt in R. Thapar, 2008, The Aryan:
Recasting Constructs, Delhi.
———, 1984, “The Mouse in the Ancestry”, in S.D. Joshi (ed.),
Amṛtadhāra, Pune, 427–34.
———, 1986, “Society and Historical Consciousness: The Itihāsa­Purāṇa
Tradition”, in S. Bhattacharya and R. Thapar (eds), Situating Indian
History, Delhi.
———, 1989, “Epic and History: Tradition, Dissent and Politics in India”,
P and P, 125, 3–26.
———, 1990, “A Historical Perspective on the Story of Rama”, in Sarve-
palli Gopal (ed.), Anatomy of a Confrontation, New Delhi.
———, 1991, “Genealogical Patterns as Perceptions of the Past”, Studies
in History, January–June, 7, 1, 1–36.
———, 1997 (2nd edn), Aśoka and the Decline of the Mauryas, Delhi.
———, 2000, Cultural Pasts, Delhi.
———, 2000 (2nd edn), From Lineage to State, Delhi.
———, 2000 (2nd edn), Interpreting Early India, Delhi.
———, 2000, “The Ṛgveda: Encapsulating Social Change”, in K.N.
Panni kar, et al. (eds), The Making of History, Delhi.
———, 2000, “Sacrifice, Surplus and the Soul”, The Foerster Lecture,
Berkeley, in idem, Cultural Pasts, Delhi.
Bibliography 733
———, 2000, “Origin Myths and the Early Indian Historical Tradition”,
in idem, Cultural Pasts, 754–80.
———, 2000, Time as a Metaphor of History, Delhi.
———, 2001, “Perceiving the Forest: Early India”, Studies in History, 17,
1, 1–16.
———, 2002, “The Role of the Army in the Exercise of Power in Early
India”, in A. Chaniotis and P. Ducrey (eds), Army and Power in the
Ancient World, Stuttgart.
———, 2004, Somanatha: The Many Voices of a History, Delhi.
———, 2008, “Rāyā Asoko from Kanaganhalli: Some Thoughts”, in
Airāvati, Chennai, 249–62.
———, 2008/2011 (rpnt), The Aryan: Recasting Constructs, Gurgaon/
Delhi.
———, 2009, “The Purāṇas: Heresy and the Vaṃśānucarita”, in I. Baner-
jee­Dube and S. Dube (eds), Ancient to Modern: Religion, Power and
Community in India, Delhi.
———, 2009, “Variants as Historical Statements: The Rama-katha in
Early India”, in H.L. Seneviratne (ed.), The Anthropologist and the
Native: Essays for Gananath Obeyesekere, Florence.
———, 2011, “Inscriptions as Historical Writing in Early India: Third
Century bc to Sixth Century ad”, in A. Feldherr and G. Hardy (eds),
The Oxford History of Historical Writing, vol. I, Oxford.
———, 2011, “Was there Historical Writing in Early India?”, in C. Talbot
(ed.), Knowing India, Delhi.
Thompson, S., 1955–8, Motif-Index of Folk Literature, Bloomington.
Thomson, G., 1949, Studies in Ancient Greek Society, London.
Thorner, D., 1966, “Marx on India and the Asiatic Mode of Production”,
Contributions, X, 9, 33ff.
Tod, J., 1829/1960 (rpnt), Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan, vol. I,
London.
Tokunaga, M., 1993, “Structure of the Rājadharma Section in the Yajña-
valkya-smṛti”, MFL, Kyoto University, no. 32, Kyoto.
———, 2009, “Vedic Exegesis and Epic Poetry: A Note on atrāpy
udāharanti”, in P. Koskikallio (ed.), Parallels and Comparisons, Zagreb.
Trautmann, T., 1969, “Length of Generation and Reign in Ancient
India”, JAOS, 89, 3, 564–77.
———, 1971, Kauṭilya and the Arthaśāstra, Leiden.
———, 1981, Dravidian Kinship, Cambridge.
———, 1997, Aryans and British India, Berkeley.
Turnour, G., 1836, An Epitome of the History of Ceylon Compiled from
734 Bibliography
Native Annals; and the First Twenty Chapters of the Mahawanso,
Cotta.
Unis, N.P., 1980, A History of Mūṣikavamśa, Trivandrum.
Upreti, K., 1995, India as Reflected in the Divyāvadāna, Delhi.
Utgikar, N.B., 1929, “Some Points of Contact between the Mahābhārata
and the Jātakas”, JBBRAS (n.s.), 4, 115–34.
Vaidya, C.V., 1906/1972 (rev. edn), The Riddle of the Ramayana, Poona/
Delhi.
Vajrācārya, D. and K.P. Malla (ed. and trans.), 1985, The Gopālarājavaṃśāvalī,
Wiesbaden. Also see above, Gopālarājavaṃśāvalī, The.
Vansina, J., 1965, The Oral Tradition, London.
———, 1985, Oral Tradition as History, London.
Vassilkov, Y., 1995, “The Mahābhārata’s Typological Definition Recon-
sidered”, IIJ, 38, 249–56.
———, 2002, “Indian Practice of Pilgrimage and the Growth of the Maha-
bharata”, in M. Brockington (ed.), Stages and Transitions, Zagreb.
Veyne, P., 1984, Writing History, Middletown.
———, 1988, Did the Greeks Believe in their Myths? Chicago.
Vogel, J. Ph., 1911, Antiquities of Chamba State, vol. I (ASI New Imperial
Series), vol. 36, Calcutta.
von Fürer-Haimendorf, C., 1961, “The Historical Value of Indian Bardic
Literature”, in C.H. Philips (ed.), Historians of India, Pakistan and
Ceylon, London.
Wagle, N.K., 2007, “Heroes in the Charitra-bhakhar, Povada and Akhyana
of Seventeenth and Eighteenth Century Maharashtra”, in H. Bruckner
(ed.), The Concept of Hero in Indian Culture, Delhi.
Wagle, N.R., 1974, “A Study of Kinship Groups in the Ramayana of
Valmiki”, in G. Kurien (ed.), The Family in India, The Hague.
Waldman, M.R., 1980, Towards a Theory of Historical Narrative, Colum-
bus.
Walters, J.S., 2000, “Buddhist History”, in R. Inden, et al. (eds), Querying
the Medieval, Oxford.
Wang, Q.E., 2007, “Is There a Chinese Mode of Historical Thinking? A
Cross-Cultural Analysis”, HT, 46, 201–9.
Warder, A.K., 1970, Indian Buddhism, Delhi.
———, 1972, An Introduction to Indian Historiography, Bombay.
———, 1974, Indian Kavya Literature, vol. II, Delhi.
Warren, H.C. and Dharmanand Kosambi (eds), 1950, Visuddhimagga of
Buddhaghosa, Cambridge (Mass.).
Warriar, G., 1939, “Studies in the Mūṣaka­vaṃśā”, Rama Varma Research
Institute Bulletin, 7, 2, 118–31.
Bibliography 735
Waterfield, W., 1923/1990, The Lay of Alha, Gurgaon.
Watters, T., 1961/1973 (rpnt), On Yuan Chwang’s Travels in India, vol. I,
Delhi.
Weber, A., 1853, Indische Literaturgesichte, Berlin.
Weber, M., 1958, The Religion of India: The Sociology of Hinduism and
Buddhism, Glencoe.
———, 1968 (rpnt), Economy and Society, vol. II, London.
Whaling, F., 1980, The Rise of the Religious Significance of Rama,
Delhi.
White, D.G., 1996, The Alchemical Body: Siddha Traditions in Medieval
India, Chicago.
Wijetunga, W.M.K., 1969–70, “The Spread of Heterodox Buddhist Doc-
trines in Early Ceylon”, The Ceylon Historical Journal, 19, 14–28.
Wilford, F., 1799, “On the Chronology of the Hindus”, Asiatic Researches,
5, 241–95.
———, 1809, “An Essay on the Sacred Isles in the West, with Other
Essays Connected with that Work”, Asiatic Researches, 8, 245ff.
Williams, B., 2002, Truth and Truthfulness, New Jersey.
Williams, J., 1973, “A Recent Aśokan Capital and the Gupta Attitude
towards the Past”, Artibus Asiae, 35, 225–40.
———, 1982, The Art of Gupta India: Empire and Province, New
Jersey.
Wilson, H.H., 1828, MacKenzie Collection: A Descriptive Catalogue,
2 vols, Calcutta.
———, 1838, “Analysis of the Puranas”, JRAS, V, 61ff.
———, 1960 (rpnt), The Hindu History of Kashmir, Calcutta.
Winternitz, M., 1977/1991 (rpnts), History of Indian Literature, 2 vols,
Delhi.
Witzel, M., 1989, “Tracing the Vedic Dialects”, in C. Caillat (ed.), Dia-
lectes dans les literatures Indo-Aryennes, Paris.
———, 1990, “On Indian Historical Writing”, Journal of the Japanese
Association for South Asian Studies, 2, 1–57.
———, 1999, “Substrate Languages in Old Indo-Aryan (Rigvedic, Middle
and Later Vedic)”, EJVS, 5, 1, 1–67.
———, 2005, “The Vedas and the Epics: Some Comparative Notes on
Persons, Lineages, Geography and Grammar”, in P. Koskikallio (ed.),
Epics, Khilas and Puranas: Continuities and Ruptures, Zagreb.
Woodward, F.W. and E.M. Hare (trans.), 1932, The Book of Gradual
Sayings, London.
Wright, J.C., 1967, “Purūravas and Urvaśī”, BSOAS, 30, 526–47.
736 Bibliography
Yadav, B.N.S., 1978, “The Accounts of the Kali Age and the Social Transi-
tion from Antiquity to the Middle Ages”, IHR, 5, 1 and 2, 31–63.
———, 1973, Society and Culture in Northern India in the Twelfth Cen-
tury, Allahabad.
Yajnik, M.N., 1930, Genealogical Tables of the Solar and Lunar Dynas-
ties, Baroda.
Yamamoto, K., 2003, The Oral Background of Persian Epics: Story-telling
and Poetry, Leiden.
Zaehner, R., 1961, The Dawn and Twilight of Zoroastrianism, New
York.
Ziegler, N., 1976, “Marwari Historical Chronicles”, IESHR, 13, 2,
219ff.
———, 1976, “The Seventeenth Century Chronicles of Marvara: A Study
in the Evolution and Use of Oral Tradition in Western India”, History
in Africa, 3, 127–53.
Zurcher, E., 1959, The Buddhist Conquest of China, Leiden.
Index
Abhayagiri-vihāra, 427, 436, 440 Ajātaśatru, 183, 382, 400, 403,
Abhimanyu, 175, 631 424, 688
Abhinavagupta, 355, 358, 376, 599 Ajayagadh, 557, 570–1, 595
Abhiniṣkramaṇa Sūtra, 450 Ajayapāla, 668, 676
Ābhira, 255, 662 Ajayavarman, 631
abhiṣeka, 103, 109 Ajīgarta, 131–2
Abhyāvartin Cāyamāna, 116, 119 Ājīvikas, 372, 438, 457
Abu’l Fazl, 16, 680 ākhyāna, 127, 129–31, 140, 146,
Ācāraṅgasūtra, 654 162, 172, 193, 272, 474
Achaemenid Iran, 321 akṣapaṭalādhikārin, 555
Ādi parvan, 151, 159, 173 Al-Biruni, 16–17, 617
Ādipurāṇa, 57, 658–9 Alchi, 627, 638
Ādityavaṃśa, 252, 630, 632, 635, Alexander, 20, 37, 325, 360, 364,
644 369
Ādityavardhana, 492 Ālhā Rāso, 581
Ādityayaśa, 251 Allah-ud-din, 572
Aeneas, 13 Amarāvati, 322
Āgama-ḍambara, 620 amātya-mukhyam, 373
āgamas, 248 Amoghavarṣa I, 659
Agnikula, 552, 561, 581, 589, 639 Anāgatavaṃsa, 443
agrahāra, 350–1, 480–1, 509, 514, Anahilapātana, 627
527, 534, 539, 541, 555, 569, Ānanda, 400, 458
578, 610–11, 618–19, 647, 694 Ānandavardhana, 496
ahiṃsā, 427, 660, 679 Ānaṅgapāla, 582
Āhir, 581, 585 Andau, 322, 335
Ahoms, 598 Andhaka-Vṛṣṇis/Andhavenhu,
Aitareya Brāhmaṇa, 92, 94, 96, 172, 182, 185, 215, 259
103, 106–7, 109, 112, 118, Aṅga, 97, 275, 290
122–5, 129, 131, 141, 146, 204 Aṅgirasa, 92, 95–7, 100, 125,
aitihāsika paurāṇikas, 314 131–3, 137, 254, 277, 312, 574
Ajamīḍha, 172, 175–6 Aṅguttara-nikāya, 387, 394, 428
738 Index
Antialkidas, 335 660, 664–5, 672, 676, 687–8
Antigonus, 325 Aśokarājā-sūtra, 454
Antiochus, 325 Aśokaśrikunāla-kathā, 664
Anu, 116, 172, 174, 289 Aśokasūtra, 454
Anukramaṇīs, 113 Aśokāvadāna, 63, 389, 453–6,
Anurādhapura, 415–16, 434, 441 458–60, 463, 475, 516, 600,
Anuśāsana-parvan, 60, 151, 156, 610, 676
163, 167, 171, 173, 185, 192, asura rākṣasa, 118, 174, 307
206, 231, 275 Aśvaghoṣa, 212, 226, 389, 446–8,
Apabhraṃśa, 141, 391, 602 477
āpad-dharma, 171, 192, 198 aśvamedha, 56, 72, 103, 109, 112,
apsarā/apsaras, 108, 133–4, 158, 123–7, 129–30, 146, 159, 224,
173–4, 247, 252, 289, 340, 582 226, 230, 245, 258, 337, 514,
arhat/arahant, 316, 445, 466 535, 554
arājya, 180, 239, 404 Aśvapati, 494
Aramaic, 321, 324, 460 Aśvins, 115, 153
araṇya, 69–70, 101, 170, 180, 241, aṭavikas, 68, 71, 327, 489, 501, 519,
253, 277, 490, 494 522, 524
Araṇyakāṇḍa, 221, 234, 242–3 Atharvaveda, 56, 89–90, 93–6, 98,
Āraṭṭa, 182, 189 107, 122–4, 127, 133, 138–9
Ardha-Māgadhi, 386, 653 Ātman, 383, 408, 412, 657
Aristotle, 27 Atri, 552, 561, 574
Arjuna, 77, 157, 175, 178, 190, Aṭṭhakathā, 417, 421, 429
199–200, 289, 481, 562, 668 Atula, 634
Ārya Kṣemeśvara, 502 Augustine, 12–13
Āryabhaṭṭa, 161, 556 Aurangzeb, 81
āryadeśa, 613 Austro-Asiatic, 268
ārya-deva, 374 Avadānakalpalatā, 454
Āryamañjuśrīmūlakalpa, 484, 488, Avadāna-śataka, 453
495, 507 Avanti, 448, 453, 504
ārya-varta, 275 Avantivarman, 356, 613–14, 617,
Āsaṭa, 635, 639, 644–6 621
Asiatic Mode of Production, 27, Avesta, 96, 305
34 Ayodhyā, 210–11, 215, 221–3,
Asiatic Society, 25, 33, 36–7 227, 232, 236–9, 250, 259–60,
Aśoka, 21, 37, 63, 71, 79, 82, 91, 288, 337
198–200, 246, 296, 301, 314, Ayodhyākāṇḍa, 214, 216, 221–2,
323–7, 330, 334, 338–9, 341–3, 224, 230, 239, 246
348, 351–2, 363, 372, 383, Āyogava, 122
389–90, 401, 410, 413, 415, Āyus, 177
419–20, 422, 424–7, 431–3,
437–8, 442, 447, 453–60, Babylonian, 284, 302
462–3, 466, 477, 506, 510, 516, Bactrian, 37, 71, 459, 477, 556
531, 554, 603, 605, 610, 656, Bāhlikas, 189, 296
Index 739
Balabhadra, 566 Bhoja Paramāra, 659
Baladeva, 248, 255, 663 Bhojavarman, 501, 559, 571
Balāditya, 611 Bhoṭavarman, 639
Bālakāṇḍa, 220–1 Bhṛgus, 92, 95–7, 100, 116,
Balbūtha, 117 128, 141, 147, 157–9, 162,
Bāṇabhaṭṭa, 64, 358, 479–96 164, 166–8, 171, 173–4, 176,
Banaphar Rajputs, 583, 585–6 193, 221, 228, 254, 260, 277,
Basholi, 627, 641 312–14, 475, 480–1, 509, 530,
Bayhaqi, 16 538, 574
Bede, 12–13 Bhṛgvāṅgirasa, 55, 95, 97–9
Berossus, 284–5 Bhū, 497, 512
Bhadrabāhu, 656, 664, 676 bhukti, 501
bhāgadugha, 128 Bhūṣana Bhaṭṭa, 482
Bhagavad-Gītā, 193, 448, 518 Bhutas, 418
Bhāgavata, 162, 220, 223, 280, Bhuvanadevī, 559
318, 458, 629, 678, 693 Bible, 12
Bhāgavata Purāṇa, 629, 638 Bikramaris, 358
Bhairavācārya, 483 Bilhaṇa, 509, 532, 568, 604–5,
bhakti, 242, 247, 369, 448, 476, 672
517, 524, 531, 545 Bimbisāra, 183, 219, 249, 262,
Bhāradvāja, 116, 174, 176, 226, 382, 403, 424, 438, 448, 450,
289, 647 452, 464, 656, 659
Bharata Dauḥṣanti, 126 Bindusāra, 383, 449, 457, 665
Bharatas, 103, 118, 132, 137, 148, bodhisattva, 219, 336, 426, 437,
151, 172–4, 176, 205, 631 443, 446, 454, 466, 513, 689
Bhāratavarṣa, 81, 252, 278, 282, Brahmā, 179, 195, 202, 230, 242,
657 271, 277–8, 283–4, 316, 552,
Bhārgava, 159, 168, 202, 226, 256 630, 670
Bhartṛhari, 677 brahmadeya, 346
bhāṣā, 91, 646 brahma-kṣatra, 95, 141, 167, 514,
Bhāskaravarman, 488, 515, 536 561, 582
Bhaṭṭa Jayanta, 620 Brāhmaṇa, 16, 22, 37, 39–40, 56,
Bhattiprolu, 322, 333 74, 80, 90, 94–6, 107, 110–11,
Bhauṭṭa/Bhoṭa, 564, 612, 620, 639 120, 123, 125, 131–2, 136,
Bhāva Bṛhaspati, 674–5 141, 156, 158–9, 164, 174, 176,
Bhaviṣya Purāṇa, 270, 581 188, 190, 193–4, 198, 228–9,
Bhāvya, 94, 117 231, 235, 242, 254, 272–5, 296,
Bhikṣācāra, 619 298–9, 307, 310–12, 314, 316,
Bhilla, 254, 277, 489, 571, 592, 329, 337, 339, 344, 346, 350,
662, 671 356, 360, 362–3, 371–3, 392,
Bhīma, 289, 500–3, 662, 671 395, 397, 452, 455, 477, 480–1,
Bhīma I, 671 484, 490, 492, 495, 498, 505,
Bhīṣma, 152–3, 163, 176, 190, 509–10, 514–15, 525, 527, 529,
193–4, 206, 448 539–40, 549, 553–555, 561
740 Index
Brāhmaṇas, 16–17, 21–2, 30, 37, 464, 483, 493, 517–19, 522,
39, 44–5, 50, 56, 58, 73–4, 89– 530–1, 539, 545, 663, 679
93, 98, 105–7, 109, 118, 123–4, Campaka, 628, 644–5
126, 133, 136–8, 141–2, 147–8, Campāvatī, 636
154, 157–9, 162, 164, 166–7, Cāmuṇḍarāja, 668
169–71, 175, 180, 188, 192, Cāṇakya, 359–60, 362–76, 425,
194, 197–200, 217, 229, 238, 656, 664–5, 687–8
245–6, 254, 258, 272–4, 277, Cāṇakya Candragupta-kathā, 664
297–299, 305, 307–8, 311–17, caṇḍālas, 74, 198, 366–7, 371,
328, 333, 339, 344–5, 350, 369, 452, 481, 554, 569, 588, 591–2
371, 373, 388, 399, 457, 475, Candanadāsa, 365–7, 371
492, 496, 509–10 Candella, 64, 551, 558–74, 577–8,
Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa, 270, 273, 276 580–6, 588–9, 591–5, 659, 666,
Brahmaur, 626–7, 631–3, 636, 639, 692
643 Caṇḍi, 499
brāhmī, 37, 91, 321, 324, 326, 341, Caṇḍikauśika, 502
551, 646 Candra Gupta II, 341, 345, 352,
Bṛhad-devatā, 91, 113, 130, 159 355–8, 369, 486
Bṛhadratha, 295–6 Candragupta Maurya, 256, 282,
Bṛhaspati, 302, 582, 674 325, 338–9, 356, 363, 368, 425,
Bṛhatkathāmañjari, 375 502, 656, 660, 665
Bṛhatsaṃhitā, 609 Candrāpīḍa, 612
Buchanan, F., 36 Candrātreya, 561, 574
Buddhacarita, 212, 389, 445–9, Candravaṃśa, 151, 230, 251–2,
477 258, 281, 283–4, 288–91, 295,
Buddhadatta, 429 307–8, 310, 315, 318, 330, 347,
Buddhaghosa, 388, 428–31, 444, 474, 552, 561–2, 686
464 Candreśvara, 636
Buddhāvadāna, 446 Cāpotkaṭa, 670
Buddhavaṃsa, 387, 399, 416, 429, cāraṇas, 228
442–3 carita, 46, 55, 64, 83, 248, 316,
Buhler, J.G., 651 349, 358–9, 446–7, 462, 468,
Bundelkhand, 255–6, 495, 557–8 472, 474–6, 479–80, 482, 496,
buruñjis, 598 506–8, 530, 539, 541–6, 598,
651–2, 655, 662–3, 691
Cāhamāna, 557–8, 561, 563, Carpaṭi/Carpaṭa, 636–7
566–7, 570–1, 580–1, 583–4, Cārvāka, 199, 306, 568, 620, 660
659, 669, 671, 676–7 Caṣṭana, 338
caityas, 235, 335 Cauhāna, 77–8, 80, 558, 581, 659,
Cakrapālita, 343 669
Cakravarman, 621 Caulukya, 64, 569, 652, 659,
Cakravartin/cakkavatti, 146, 194, 661–2, 664, 666, 668–71,
252, 277, 325, 403–6, 420, 426, 676–7, 679
437–8, 446, 449–50, 454, 460, Cauñṣaṭh-Yoginī, 593
Index 741
Cāvaḍā, 666–8, 670 Damila, 420, 426, 429, 438–40
Cedi, 103, 117, 126, 154, 172, 174, dāna, 10, 121, 128, 188, 197, 199,
181, 217–18, 227, 252, 256, 260, 217, 219, 406, 464, 493–4, 547,
289, 329–30, 348, 423, 536, 539, 553, 660
556–7, 563, 566, 575, 577 dāna-stuti, 60, 87, 90, 92, 111,
Central Asia, 16, 77–8, 101, 296, 113–24, 126–8, 140, 143, 145,
306, 321, 338, 461, 506, 537, 150, 187, 476, 516, 685
599, 608, 611–12, 614, 638 dānava, 96, 173–4, 176
Cera, 634 daṇḍa-dharma, 192
Cetīya Jātaka, 177 Daṇḍakāraṇya, 288
Chamba, 64, 600, 626–51, 666, Dards, 612
678, 692–3, 695 dāsa, 104–7, 116–17, 119, 123,
Chambiyāli, 629, 639, 646–7 185, 187, 501, 529
Campā, 403, 455, 636 Daśagrīva, 250, 252
Chand Bardai, 580, 584–5 Daśapura, 334
chandas, 90–1 dāsaputtas, 215, 259
Chavillākara, 605, 610 dāśarājña, 112, 116, 118, 137, 176
Chicha, 565 Dasaratha Jātaka, 395, 397
Chinese historical tradition, 19, 37, dāsyaḥ-putraḥ brāhmaṇas, 91
351, 444 dasyu, 95, 104, 132, 170, 182,
Chitral, 322 200, 306, 500, 622
Chittor, 358 Dāṭhavaṃsa, 430
Christian Church, 12, 20, 533 De Civitate Dei, 13
clan society, 60–2, 65–6, 68–72, Delhi Sultanate, 42
74–5, 100–1, 113, 115, 140, 145, Demetrios, 329
151, 156, 160, 168, 170, 178, Descartes, 14
184, 207, 236, 244, 281, 292, Devānaṃpiya Tissa, 420, 423,
296, 314, 411, 554, 638, 654, 433, 435–6
683, 685 Devāpi, 130–1, 152, 159, 175, 179,
Colebrooke, H., 22 289
Collingwood, R.G., 11 devaputra, 336–7
Crusades, 22 Devarāja, 595
Cūlavaṃsa, 388, 416, 421, 428, Devavarman, 559, 567–8
430 Devayānī, 174, 176
Cullavagga, 387 Devīcandragupta, 355–9, 369, 486
Cunningham, Alexander, 37 Dhammapada, 387
Curzon, 33 dhammiko-dhammarājā, 406
Dhaṅgadeva, 565
Dadhīca, 480 Dharmadeva, 574
Dakṣa, 174, 283 Dharmapāla, 498, 500, 504–6, 512
dakṣinā, 98, 114, 121, 124, 128 Dharmāraṇya Mahātmya, 675
Dakṣina Kosala, 256 Dharmasūtras/Dharmaśāstras,
dakṣināpatha, 230 22, 32, 70, 90, 98, 100, 107,
Ḍāmaras, 614, 619, 621–3 152, 168, 189, 194–5, 199–200,
742 Index
246, 278–9, 307, 340, 371, 510, Eliot, H.M., 82, 358
524–5, 529, 537, 540 Enlightenment, 14–15, 21, 27, 384,
Dhauli, 322 412, 446–8, 451, 682
Dhṛtarāṣṭra, 171–2, 176 European Historical Traditions,
Dhruvadevī, 357–9 9–12
Dhundirāja, 376 Eusebius, 12–13, 688
Diddā, 614–15, 618–19
Digambara, 249, 279, 655, 660, Ferishtah, 17
672, 677 Fifth Veda, 56, 100, 146, 151, 158,
Dīgha-nikāya, 382–3, 387, 393–5, 172, 271–2
400, 403–6, 419, 428, 443, 451 Firdausi, 15–16
dig-vijaya, 109, 128, 154, 182, 197, Firuz Shah Tughlaq, 342, 352,
286, 404, 448, 474, 487, 508, 548
515, 517, 521, 617 Fort William, 38
Dilīpa, 229–230
Dipaṅkara, 407 gadhaiya, 526, 593
Dīpavaṃsa, 63, 388, 416–22, 427, Gāhaḍvālas, 502
439–40, 466 gahapati, 332, 334, 414, 461, 464
Dīrghatamas Māmateya, 91 gāmaṇi, 435
Divākaramitra, 490, 526, 533 gaṇa-rājyas, 69, 551
Divodāsa Atithigva, 117 gaṇa-saṅghas, 69, 71, 169–70,
Divokka, 500 182, 185–6, 193, 199, 219, 239,
Divya, 500–1, 503, 505, 603 246, 261, 296, 382, 402–3, 411,
Divyāvadāna, 389, 445, 451, 433, 464, 654
453–61 Gaṇḍa, 559, 566
Doab, 77, 97, 101, 148, 169, 176, Gandhāra, 135, 181–2, 238, 322,
182, 289, 295 445, 449–50, 454, 461, 467,
Domb, 617, 620 484, 504, 611, 613–14, 618
Draupadī, 153, 155, 188, 190 Gāndhārī, 153, 182, 190, 389, 445
Dravidian, 28, 210, 268, 328 gāndharvas, 173
Druhyu, 95, 102, 116, 172, 174, Gaṅgādhara, 647
289 Garh Mandla, 572
Durlabharāja, 668 Garuḍa, 226
Duryodhana, 153, 190–1 gāthā, 56, 87, 90, 93, 98, 113,
dūtaka, 493 123–4, 126–7, 130, 140, 145,
Duṭṭhagāmaṇi, 420, 426, 435, 440 165, 271–2, 389
Dvāpara yuga, 269 gāthins, 124, 132
Dvārakā, 177, 181, 191 Gauḍa, 350, 483, 486–8, 496,
Dvyāśraya-kāvya, 651–2, 661, 672 563–5, 574, 578, 613, 648, 659
Gautama Akṣapāda, 574
East India Company, 21 gāyatrī mantra, 99
Ekāṅgas, 614, 622 Geiger, W., 415–16, 427
Elāra, 420, 426, 440 Geoffrey of Monmouth, 13
Eliade, M., 52, 205, 286, 303 German Romanticism, 29, 31
Index 743
Ghaṭa Jātaka, 215, 423 Harṣavardhana, 479, 491
Ghiyasuddin Balban, 76–7 Hastināpura, 153–4, 163, 175–6,
Gilgamesh, 10 180–1, 295, 453
Gilgit, 322 Hathigumpha, 71, 218, 260, 322,
Girnar, 322, 338–9, 343 329–30, 476
Gobineau, 30–31 Hegel, G.W. F., 25, 28–9, 35
Gonanda I and II, 607, 609 Helarāja, 605
Gond, 562, 564, 572–3, 581, 584, Heliodorus, 335
592, 594 Hellenistic, 20–1, 37, 309, 324–5,
Gopāla, 496, 499, 504–5, 530, 568 327, 390, 402, 556, 611, 698
Gopāla II, 505 Hemacandra, 375, 651–2, 659,
Gotami Balasiri, 328, 476 661–2, 664, 667, 671–6, 680,
Govinda Gupta, 359 693
Grahavarman, 356, 485, 490–1 Hemarāja, 582
grantha, 551 Hemasūri, 675
Greco-Bactrian, 459 Herambapāla, 564
Greco-Roman, 10, 14–15, 17–18, Herder, J., 29, 104, 119
20, 37, 53, 334, 682 Herodotus, 11, 19
gṛhapati, 103 Hesiod, 204–5, 305
Grihyasūtras, 90 Hīnayāna, 402, 429, 439, 516,
Gugga, 632 688–9
Guhila Rajputs, 624 Hindu Shāhiya, 614–15
Guṇacandra, 667 Hissar, 342
Gunāḍhya (Bṛhatkathā), 494 Hitopadeśa, 538
Homer, 148, 161, 184
Haihaya, 172, 215, 227, 230, 252, Huizinga, J., 51
256, 259–60, 288, 330, 670 Hūṇa, 149, 431, 484–5, 611, 662
Haileybury College, 28 Hwui, Li, 493–4
Hāla, 479
Hammīramahākāvya, 652 Ibn Khaldun, 17, 19–20
Hammīravarman, 559, 571–2 Ikṣvāku/Ikkhaga, 122, 131, 138,
Hanumān, 221, 223, 232, 247, 254 21516, 218, 229–30, 240,
Harappan, 30, 42, 58, 87–8, 102, 250–4, 261, 284, 287–8, 308,
285, 320 318, 395, 418, 450–2, 499,
Haraxvaiti, 135 630–1
Hariṣena, 341 Ilā, 133–4, 138, 151, 172, 174,
Harivaṃśa-purāṇa, 655 284, 288, 308, 318, 330, 335,
Hariyānaka, 77 388
Hariyūpīyā, 116, 119 Iltutmish, 342
Harṣacarita, 358, 471–506, Indal, 584
513, 517, 519, 522, 526, 529, Indica, 384
533, 542, 563, 592, 605, 644, Indo-Aryan, 28–30, 41, 87–8, 91,
691 93, 95, 97, 102, 104, 138, 285,
Harṣadeva, 505, 560 320–1, 328, 396
744 Index
Indo-Bactrian Greeks, 37, 71, 477, Jātaka, 103, 147, 209, 213–19,
556 238–9, 248, 259, 261, 387, 419,
Indo-European, 30, 285 444, 447, 451
Indra, 95, 104, 106–7, 109, 114–17, Jaya, 164
124, 139, 167, 169, 212, 217, Jayacanda, 583–4, 659
242–3, 260 Jayaddisa Jātaka, 218
Indrabhūti, 248 Jayapāla, 565
Indra-gāthā, 124 Jayāpīḍa, 613
Indrajit Gahirwar, 582 Jayaśakti, 559, 562, 565
Indraprastha, 154, 180–1 Jayasimha Siddharāja, 662, 668–9,
Islamic historical tradition, 20 672, 679
itihāsa, 55–62, 76, 81 jayastambhas, 342
itihāsam purātanam, 162, 696 Jayavarman, 559, 565, 569, 639
itihāsa-purāṇa, 55–7, 59–62, 76, Jejākabhukti, 558, 562, 567, 569,
82, 87, 95–6, 100, 130, 138, 573, 590, 595
140, 142, 213, 231, 265, 271–2, Jerome, 12
342, 392, 402, 463, 472–6, Jinasena, 57, 148, 655, 658–9
509, 538, 541, 544, 567, Jñātrika, 382
669, 678, 684, 688–9, 695, Joachim of Fiore, 13
698–700 Jonarāja, 625
itihāsa-samvāda, 392 Jones, W., 18–23, 25–7, 33, 36,
itihāsaveda, 56 267, 269, 325, 450, 598
itivṛtta, 57, 130 Josephus, 13
Judaeo-Christian historical
Jacobi, H., 209, 228, 248, 651 writing, 17–18
Jagatsiṃha, 640 Junnar, 331
Jagnaik Rao, 581 Jyotiśa-Vedāṅga, 302
Jahangir, 79, 341–2, 352
Jahnus, 132 Kācara, 575
Jainism, 22, 170, 193, 249, 256, Kaccha, 671
259, 332, 336, 382, 411, 463, Kādambarī, 479, 485, 494
528, 653, 655, 662–3, 665–6, Kaikeyī, 223, 244, 252–3
668, 674–6, 678–80, 693 Kailāsa, 564
Jalauka, 610–11 kaisara, 336–7
Jambudvīpa, 81, 182, 249, 278, Kaivarta, 310, 497, 500–1, 503–6,
407, 460, 657 512, 521–3, 525, 529–30, 532,
Janaka, 138, 215, 223, 230–1, 252, 534, 622
288, 448 Kakṣīvant Auśija, 94
Janamejaya, 122, 126, 146, 157, Kakutstha, 562
172, 175, 191, 606 kāla, 139, 204
Janārdana, 640, 649 Kalacuri, 330, 348, 499, 556–7,
Jarāsandha, 148, 154, 169, 172, 558, 562, 566, 568, 575, 577,
182–3, 191, 218, 260, 609, 583, 593
663 Kālakācārya Kathānaka, 659
Index 745
Kālañjara, 495, 557, 559, 563, 566, Kāsiputa, 335
568, 571–2, 578, 582–4, 590, Kāśmīra, 372, 563
595 Kassapa, 400
Kalhaṇa, 19, 64, 78, 161, 551, Kaśyapa, 552, 630, 647
598–606, 610–25, 629, 641, 646, kathā, 127, 130, 146, 159, 162, 474
678, 692–3 Kathānaka, 656, 659, 664
Kāli, 139, 202–5, 207, 294, 297, Kathāsaritasāgara, 494
301, 348, 375, 498, 537, 639 Kathāvatthu, 387, 428, 445
Kālidāsa, 354, 356, 370, 479 kathāvid, 608
Kaliṅga, 71, 199, 217–18, 236, 251, Kauravas, 146, 151–3, 155, 178,
256, 260, 290, 328–30, 424, 186, 191–2, 196, 201, 670
437, 476, 577 Kauśāmbi, 79, 135, 163, 295, 401,
Kaliyuga, 161, 202–3, 269, 297, 403, 448, 453–4
299, 301–2, 304–5, 348, 405, Kauṭilya Arthaśāstra, 57, 71–2,
523, 535–7, 556, 564, 604, 609, 130, 163, 168, 170, 186, 218,
624, 698, 700 274, 296, 327, 360–3, 367, 369,
Kalkin, 297, 306, 443 373–4, 376, 403, 406, 425, 485,
kalpa, 202, 257, 278, 300–2, 327, 524, 549, 566, 598, 621, 656,
408 660–1, 678
Kalpasūtra, 654 Kavaṣa Ailūṣa, 118, 141
Kāmandaka, 524 kavi, 93–4, 114, 125, 158, 166,
Kāmarūpa, 483, 488 594, 624
Kāmbojas, 327 kavipraśasti, 498
Kanaganahalli, 331, 477 kāvya, 47, 64, 127, 146, 220, 349,
Kanauj/Kānyakubja, 350–1, 478–9, 437, 468, 472, 544, 597, 599,
482, 485–8, 490–3, 504–5, 516, 602–3, 628, 691, 693–4
523, 536, 567, 577, 583, 594, Kāvyadarśa, 577
613, 659, 670 Kāvyamīmāṃsā, 358
Kañcukā, 559, 563 kāyastha, 40, 375, 498, 509–10,
Kanhadade-prabandha, 80 523, 525, 537–8, 540, 542, 549,
Kangra, 626–7 555, 565–6, 569, 573–6, 578,
Kaniṣka, 331, 336, 401, 431, 454, 589–90, 592, 614–15, 622–3,
462, 603, 688 644–6, 684, 695
Kaṇva, 91–2, 100, 114, 124, 140 Keshab Chandra Sen, 41
Kapālika, 594 Khajuraho, 557–60, 564, 571,
Kapilavastu, 395–6, 403, 425 576, 578, 581, 583, 586, 590,
karaṇas, 529 592–5
Kārkoṭa, 612, 623 Khandagiri, 322, 330
karma, 34, 170–1, 297, 383, 426, Khāravela, 71, 218, 251, 260,
453, 455, 476, 531, 535, 604, 329–31, 348, 476
624 kharoṣṭhī, 91, 321, 324, 336, 510,
Karṇa, 153, 648, 668, 671–2 551
Karṇāṭas, 502 Khasa, 456, 563, 607, 620
Kāśī, 292, 583 Khattavijja, 406
746 Index
khattiyas, 218, 422 582, 585–6, 588, 590, 610, 617,
Khoh, 258, 346, 561 630–2, 634–5, 650, 658, 661,
Khotan, 391 686, 690, 695, 699
Khuddaka-nikāya, 387, 444 kṣatriya vaṃśas, 295, 349
Kīra, 504, 564, 632–3, 639, 644 Kṣemagupta, 614–15
Kirāta, 254, 562 Kṣemaka, 294
Kīrtikaumudi, 667 Kṣemendra, 375–6, 496, 605
Kīrtistambhas, 342 Kṣemendra, Nṛpāvalī, 375–6, 496,
Kīrtivarman, 559, 565, 567–8, 575, 605
578, 593 kula, 185, 499, 524
Kiṣkindhā, 251, 288 Kulāñcā, 575
Kiṣkindhākāṇḍa, 221 Kulu, 372, 626
Kitabal’ibar, 17 Kumāradevī, 345
koine, 324 Kumārapāla, 662, 667–9, 673–9,
Kokkalla, 576 693
Koliyas, 216, 395–6, 451 Kunalāvadāna, 453
Kosala, 122, 135, 219, 221–2, 224, Kuntī, 146, 153, 177, 182, 190
227, 233, 236–8, 240–1, 246, Kurmeśvara, 636
256, 258, 260, 287–9, 292, 296, Kuru, 128, 131, 135, 137, 146, 159,
382, 397, 403, 425, 429, 448, 161, 172–3, 175–6, 179, 182,
453, 499, 563 185, 191, 289, 292, 322, 504,
Kosambi, D.D., 32, 43, 75, 92, 95, 563
106, 134, 151, 268, 428, 614 Kurujāṅgala, 176
Kotla, 342 Kurukṣetra, 128, 157, 161, 167,
Kraivya, 122 176, 206–7, 269, 291, 294,
Kṛṣiparāśara, 345, 593 309, 318, 607, 610, 686, 697,
Kṛṣṇa Miśra, 568 699
Kṛṣṇa Vāsudeva, 77, 185, 423 Kuru-Pañcāla, 112, 118, 125, 135,
Kṛta yuga, 276 137, 292
Kṣatrapa, 328, 339, 476, 556 Kuruśravana, 116
kṣatriya, 36, 56, 72, 74, 78, 94–5, kuśa, 180, 216, 223–4, 228, 245,
97, 106–7, 110–12, 128, 132–3, 258, 274, 610, 630, 663
136, 141, 151, 153–8, 164, Kuṣāṇas, 78, 296, 331, 336–7, 344,
166–7, 169, 173, 176, 180, 401, 454, 458, 462, 477, 531,
183–4, 186, 188–90, 192–3, 556, 611
199–200, 207, 215–18, 225, Kuśīlava, 228
228, 230, 245, 255–7, 269, 274, Kuśināra, 403
279–83, 286, 289, 291–2, 294–9, Kusumpura, 361
305–12, 315, 318, 338–9, 344, kutūhala-sālās, 383
349, 362–3, 371, 394, 397–9,
404, 406, 422, 424–5, 437, 448, Ladakh, 385, 431–2, 462, 599,
451–2, 463–4, 474, 483–4, 491, 627, 632, 638
494, 496, 504–5, 511–12, 514, Lahul, 626–7, 639
518, 537, 553, 561–3, 573, 578, Lakṣaṇādevī, 632
Index 747
Lakṣmaṇa, 223, 240, 254, 556, 395, 397, 400, 402–3, 419, 422,
560, 613, 659 424, 429, 431, 448–50, 453–4,
Lakṣmaṇasena, 556, 659 578, 612, 654, 656, 663–6
Lakṣmī, 487, 551, 637 māgadha, 97–100, 140, 160, 165,
Lakṣmī Nārāyaṇa, 637, 640, 642, 193, 228, 274, 277, 543
648 Māgadhi, 324
Lakṣmīvarman, 632–3 Mahābhārata, 56, 58, 60–1, 69,
Lalitāditya, 612–13, 617 77, 81, 118, 120, 144–207, 210,
Lalitāditya Muktāpīḍa, 612–13 218, 220–2, 224, 226, 228–32,
Lalitavistara, 389, 445, 449–53 242–3, 245, 247, 251, 256,
Lama Tāranātha, 431, 499, 505 258–9, 271–3, 275–6, 283–4,
Laṅkā, 221, 235–6, 241, 251, 253, 286–7, 289, 291, 300–1, 406,
260, 419, 428, 502 419, 423, 429, 447, 471, 481,
Lassen, Charles, 210 486–7, 497, 505, 562–3, 581,
Lāṭas, 484, 528 606–7, 609, 630–1, 648, 655,
Latin, 14, 364 663, 669–70, 684–5, 692,
Laukika, 304, 536, 602 696
Lekhaka, 549 mahādānas, 297, 514, 589
Lekhapañcāśika, 548 mahākāvya, 624
Licchavi, 169, 345, 395, 398 Mahāmoha, 654
Lineage society, 66–7, 75, 107, 131, Mahānāma, 417, 421
228, 260, 307 Mahāpadma Nanda, 161, 296, 361,
liṅgas, 632, 637 449
lipikāra, 549 mahāparinirvāṇa, 390, 406, 409,
Lohara, 615, 622 444, 449, 459
lokapāla, 515 mahāraṇakas, 577
Lokaprakāśa, 548 Mahārāṣṭra Purāṇa, 80–1
Lokāyata/Cārvāka, 306, 488, 490, Mahāsammata, 217, 260, 394, 405,
660 408, 418, 422, 448, 451–2
Lomaharṣaṇa, 273 Mahāsaṅghika, 401, 450
Lumbini, 325 Mahāsena, 421, 427, 434, 436, 440
Mahaśrisāmanta, 644
Mackenzie, C., 36–7 Māhātmyas, 606–7
Mādalā Pañjī, 81, 598 Mahāvagga, 387, 403, 452
Madanapāla, 497–8, 502, 505 Mahāvaṃsa, 63, 362–3, 388,
Madanavarman, 559, 567, 569–70, 416–18, 421–31, 434–5,
574, 576, 578, 595 437–40, 454, 456, 462–3, 466,
Madhuratha-vilāsinī, 429 555, 688
Madras, 189, 216, 494, 607 Mahāvastu, 57, 389, 395, 445,
Mādrī, 153, 182, 189 449–53
Magadha, 71, 97–8, 135, 150, 154, Mahāvihāra, 59, 388, 416–18,
169, 181–3, 191, 219, 238, 249, 420–1, 424, 427–8, 431, 434,
256, 260, 274–5, 283, 291–3, 436, 438–40, 442, 463, 467,
295–6, 310, 318, 330, 361, 382, 688
748 Index
Mahāvīra, 69, 169, 248–9, 304, Marxist/Marx, K., 27, 32–6, 43,
382, 556, 652–5, 659, 664–5, 682
669, 676, 680 Maṭ, 477
Mahāyāna, 63, 385, 402, 427–9, Mātaṅgeśvara, 594
439, 453, 466, 516, 603, 688–9 Mathura, 148, 249, 256, 322, 331,
Mahendravarman, 351, 539 336, 401–2, 422–3, 445, 453–4,
Maheśvara, 247 458, 477, 491, 654–5, 665
Mahinda, 419–20, 424–5, 433 Matsya Purāṇa, 270–2, 283–4,
Mahīpāla, 499–500, 505–6 297–300, 303, 308, 315
Mahmud of Ghazni, 16, 558, mātsyanyāya, 196, 240, 499
566–7, 600, 613, 615, 662, 671 Maukhari, 356, 481, 483, 485–6,
Mahobā-khaṇḍa, 580–1 489, 494–6, 523
Maitrakas, 483 Maurya, 63, 79, 169, 256, 282,
Majjhima-nikāya, 384, 387, 404–5, 296, 325, 330, 338–9, 356, 360,
428, 460 363, 365, 367–8, 376, 425, 453,
Mālandevī, 583 477, 502, 531, 656, 660, 665,
Mālava samvat, 348 687
Mālavikāgnimitra, 354 Max Müller, F., 26–7, 31
Malayaketu, 365–6, 371–3 McDonell, A.A., 19, 92, 96–7, 99,
Mallas, 270 117, 166, 222
Mallikārjuna, 674 Megasthenes, 21, 282, 384
mānava, 138, 286 Meghavāhana, 251, 253, 256, 260,
maṇḍalas, 88, 92, 113–14, 119, 566, 611
498, 501, 503, 519–22, Menakā, 289
530, 562, 568, 588, 613, Merutuṅga, 64, 651–2, 661–2,
622 666–8, 671–9, 692–3
maṇḍapas, 550 Meruvarman, 632–5, 643–4
Mandasor, 334, 348, 550 Metteya/Maitreya, 271, 273,
Mandhātṛ, 230, 286, 448, 630 282, 297, 306, 405, 408, 443,
Manetho, 11 459–60, 466
Manichaean, 15, 459, 461 Mewar, 543, 634
Maniya-deo, 564, 593–4 Mihirakula, 603, 611, 618
Manu Dharmaśāstra, 163, 202, milakkhas, 429
274 Milinda-pañho, 314
Manus, 276, 278–80, 282–3, 286, Mill, J., 24–7, 58
318, 609, 686 Mīmāṃsā, 45
manvantara, 269, 278–80, 300–1, Mithilā, 215, 223, 227
606 Mithraism, 300
Manyagarh, 593 Mitrātithi, 115
mārga, 528, 540, 578, 617 Mitra-Varuṇa, 115
Marīca, 552 mlecchas, 182, 198, 203, 235, 255,
Marū, 631, 636 299, 306, 324, 429, 611, 633,
Maruts, 115 669, 676–7
Marutta Āvikṣita, 126 Moggaliputta Tissa, 455
Index 749
mokṣa-dharma, 192 nāstika, 170, 197–9, 240, 246, 657
Momigliano, A., 11–14, 51, 409, nāṭakas, 354
471 Nātha, 584, 636–7, 678, 693
Montesquieu, 27 Nationalist historical writing, 65
Mount Meru, 278, 657 Nāṭya-darpana, 355
Mritunjaya Vidyalankar, 81 Nāṭyaśāstra, 56, 358
Mudrārākṣasa, 355–6, 359–62, Nayacandrasūri, 652
364–5, 374, 376, 502, 665, 687 nāyaka, 530
Mughal, 17, 20, 47, 76, 78–9, 81, Newari, 556
101, 341, 629, 639–40, 648, 650, Nidāna-kathā, 444, 451–2
680 Nighantus, 91
Muhammad Tughluq, 77–8 Nikāyas, 334, 387, 389, 391, 393,
Mūla Vinaya Piṭaka, 387, 399–400 462
Mūlarāja I, 668, 670 Nīlamata Purāṇa, 605–6, 608–9
Mūlarāja II, 668 Nimi, 215, 229–30
Mūṣakavaṃśakāvya, 634 Nirarthakathā, 147
Mūṣaṇavarman, 633–5, 644 Nirgrantha, 427, 438–9
Mutibas, 132 Nirukta, 56–7, 89, 91, 113, 130,
159, 664
Nābhakas, 327 Niṣāda, 180, 193, 226, 231, 234,
Nābhānediṣṭha, 94, 124–5 277, 297, 489, 529
Nābhapaṅktis, 327 Niṣadha, 630
Nāga, 418, 483–4, 499, 605, 607, niṣka, 238
609, 612, 643 nīti, 162, 167, 444
Nāgānanda, 493 Nītisāra, 376, 524
Nāgarjuna, 677, 690 Nītivyākāmṛta, 660
Nāgarjunakonda, 322 Nora, P., 40, 53
Nāgarjuni Hill, 478, 495 Nurpur, 627–8, 640–1, 649–50
Nāgeśa, 247 Nyāya, 45, 574, 620, 659
Nāhuṣa, 94
Naimiśa, 157, 159, 271 Okkāka, 216, 395–6, 418–19, 422
nairuktas, 142 Oldenberg, H., 399, 415–16
Nala, 630 Old Testament, 21
Nanda, 161, 169, 331, 359–65, Oriental Despotism, 24–5, 27–8,
367–9, 375–6, 382, 390–1, 400, 41
424–5, 449, 664–5 Oriental Renaissance, 28
Nannuka, 559, 562 Orientalist writing, 25
Nāradasmṛti, 521, 523–6, 543
nārāśaṃsīs, 56, 60, 87, 90, 93, 113, Paccekabuddhas, 446
123, 125–7, 129–31, 140, 145 Padmacarita, 248
Narasiṃha, 347, 632 Padmamihira, 605
Naravardhana, 492 Padminī, 358
Nārāyaṇas, 248, 497, 630, 637, 640, Paharpura, 527
642, 648 Pāhilla, 576
750 Index
Pajjan Rai, 584 272, 291, 294, 297–8, 310, 312,
pākhaṇḍa, 675 361, 418, 494, 511
Pakthas, 116 Parikṣit, 122, 126, 161, 175, 224,
Pāla, 496–500, 502–6, 521, 294
528–30, 533, 558, 662 Pārindas, 327
Pāli, 57, 59, 69, 71, 209, 213, pāriplava, 95, 127, 129–30, 140
385–92, 395, 399–400, 403, Pariśiṣṭaparvan, 375, 555, 662,
412, 415–17, 428–9, 442, 445, 664
448–50, 452–3, 456–7, 460, Parmāl Rāsau, 580–1
688, 695 Parmāras, 666
pāliya, 560 Pārthivāvalī, 605
Pallava, 351, 539 Paruṣṇī, 119, 137
palyopama, 257 Parvata, 126
pañcajanāḥ, 178 Pārvatī, 479
Pañcāla, 112, 118, 122, 125–6, pāṣaṇḍa, 279, 525–6, 654
135, 137, 153, 172, 175–6, 178, Pāśupata Śaiva, 483
181–2, 292, 504, 648 Pāṭaligāma/Pāṭaliputra, 183, 324,
pañcalakṣana, 269 360–1, 401, 403, 419, 424–5,
Pañcarātra, 561, 564 433, 437, 445, 449, 454, 516,
pañcatantra, 538 569, 578, 655, 664–5
pañcavīras, 178 Pathan, 584
Pāṇḍavas, 78, 146, 148, 151, paṭhas, 93
153–5, 161–2, 169, 173, 175, paṭṭāvalīs, 652, 655, 659
177–8, 183, 186–92, 199, 201, Paulastya, 233
289, 318, 453, 663 Paumacariyam, 209, 236, 248–57,
Pāṇḍu, 152–3, 159, 172, 176, 178, 260–1, 330, 654–5, 663, 685
182, 186, 189–90, 423 paurānikas, 130, 313, 316, 694
Paṇḍukābhaya, 423 Persia, 11, 15
Paṇḍuvāsudeva, 423 Phule, Jyotiba, 41
Pāṇḍyas, 327 Physiocrats, 28
Panidhara, 576 pīdhiyāvalī, 598
Pāṇini, 89, 91, 97, 121, 130, 146, Pijavana, 116
156, 257, 336 Piprahwa, 322, 333
Paṇis, 129 Piśācas, 607
Parākramabāhu, 438 Piṭakas, 387, 399–400, 421
paramabhaṭṭāraka, 484, 492, 505 Pitinikas, 327
Paramāras, 566, 669, 671 pitṛs, 106, 125
Paramardideva, 570, 574, 583–4 Plato, 285, 300
paramparā, 249, 421, 424 Pliny, 282
Parāśara, 152, 158, 271, 273, 282 Plutarch, 11, 364
Paraśurāma, 154, 157, 165, 167, Polybius, 12, 51
296, 644 Porāṇāṭṭhakathās, 417
Pargiter, F.E., 39, 99, 141, 161, 215, prabandha, 598, 605, 651–2, 655,
218, 233, 256, 260, 267, 270, 668
Index 751
Prabandha-cintāmaṇi, 64, 651–80, Pṛthvīrāja Cāhamāna, 659, 669,
692–3, 695 676–7
Prabhākaravardhana, 484, 486, Pṛthvīrāja-rāsau, 580–1
492, 495 Pṛthvīsiṃha, 641
Prabhāsa, 574 Ptolemy, 325
Prabhāvatī, 345 Pulakeśin II, 301, 491, 516, 537,
Prabodhacandrodaya/Kṛṣṇa 556, 698
Miśra, 568, 591, 594 Pulinda, 132, 180, 254, 277, 310,
Pradyotavaṃśa, 295 328, 422, 489, 571, 592
Prāgjyotiṣa, 612 Puṇḍhravardhana, 498
Parihāsapura, 602 purāṇa, 55–62, 76, 80–2, 87,
Prajāpati, 96, 110 95–6, 98, 100, 130, 140, 157,
Prajyabhaṭṭa, 625 173, 220
Prākrit, 62, 118, 141, 164, 209, purāṇamākhyānam, 248
248–9, 272, 321, 323–4, 328–9, Purāṇas, 265–318
331, 335–6, 338–9, 341, 349, purāṇaveda, 56
351, 371, 386, 389, 391, 445, Puranic, 20, 30, 50, 88, 148,
450, 479, 506, 510, 549–50, 161–2, 171, 215–17, 249, 260,
653, 661, 664, 695 266, 268–70, 273, 275–6, 278,
prakṛti, 70, 196, 368, 504, 645 282–5, 292–3, 296–7, 301–3,
praśasti, 64, 79, 111, 128, 143, 306–7, 309, 312, 315, 317–18,
297, 328–9, 340–7, 349, 352, 330, 337, 339–40, 343, 350,
356, 361, 368, 498, 516, 547, 354, 381, 388, 390, 398, 401,
552, 554–5, 589, 599, 605, 612, 406–8, 415
642–3, 652, 667, 669, 673, 691 Puritanism, 35
praśastipaṭṭas, 605 purohita pariṣads, 618–19
Pratāpasiṃhavarman, 639–40, Pūru, 102, 116, 118, 137, 151–2,
647 155, 159, 172, 174–6, 178, 186,
Pratihāras, 504, 558, 560, 562, 245, 287, 289, 291, 294, 306,
566–7, 577, 588, 659, 666 310
Pratijñāyaugandharāyana, 354 Purūravas, 133–4, 174, 179, 448,
pratiloma, 274 480
pratimāgṛhas, 476 puruṣasūkta, 139
Pratimānāṭaka, 477 Pusalker, A.D., 39, 268
pratiśākhyas, 89 Puṣpabhūti/Puṣyabhūti, 482–4,
prati-vāsudevas, 663 492, 511
Pravarasena, 479 Puṣyagupta, 338
Prayāga, 296, 493, 516 Puṣyamitra Śuṅga, 296, 413, 431,
Prinsep, J., 37 459
Priyadarśikā, 493
Proto-Dravidian, 210 Qutb-ud-din Aibek, 570, 680
Pṛthivī, 512
Pṛthu Vainya, 274, 276 Rāghavacarita, 248
Pṛthuśravas, 117 Raghuvamśa, 354
752 Index
raibhī, 93, 113 512, 519, 610, 655, 666, 685,
Rājabali, 81 694
Rājagṛha, 238, 249, 382, 399, 403, Rāmopākhyāna, 164, 221, 224
419, 665 raṇaka, 677
Rājaratnākara, 430 Rapson, E.J., 19, 297
Rājaśekhara, Prabandhakośa, rasa, 497, 602–3
652 Rasāyaṇa, 485
Rājataraṅgiṇī, 19, 42, 64, 78, 81, Rāṣṭrakūṭa, 358, 500, 504, 512,
161, 597–626, 639, 641, 646, 558, 659
650–1, 666, 668, 678, 692, 695 Ratnamālā, 667
rājavaṃsa, 451 Ratnāvalī, 493
rājya, 193, 200, 237, 246, 382 ratnins, 99, 107, 110
Rājyaśrī, 356, 484–6, 489–90, 495, rauta, 537, 571, 578, 587
515, 517 Rāvaṇa, 212, 222–4, 231–5,
Rājyavardhana, 484–8, 492, 495, 241–4, 248, 250, 252, 254–255,
533 260, 503
rākṣasa, 96, 118, 190, 217, 222–3, Rebha, 114
232, 234, 241–2, 307, 359–60, Renan, E., 31
362, 364–73, 519 Renaissance sense of history, 14,
rākṣasas, 60, 96, 177, 210, 217, 20, 27, 428
221–2, 225–6, 232–6, 241, 243, Rennell, J., 36
250–1, 254, 256, 258, 261, 418, Ricardo, D., 28
465, 483, 490, 499, 503, 519, Ṛgveda, 30–1, 58, 60, 87–97,
654 100–20, 122–6, 129–30,
Rākṣasavaṃśa, 251, 253 132–4, 137–9, 148, 151, 156,
Rāma, 138, 146, 164, 167, 210–12, 159, 174–6, 179, 205, 212, 243,
214, 216, 219–20, 222–4, 226, 301
229, 231–2, 234–40, 242–9, Rin chen bzang po, 638
252–5, 258, 261, 287, 307, 318, Risley, H., 35
354, 357–8, 419, 447, 497–9, Romaharṣaṇa, 272–3
503, 508, 517, 519, 530, 566, Ṛṣabha, 251–2, 658, 663, 669
595, 613, 630, 658, 663, 666 Rudradāman, 335, 338–40, 476
Rāma Gupta, 357–8
Rāma Jamadāgni, 167 Śabara, 132, 180, 234, 254, 277,
Rāmacarita, 471–506, 512, 521, 489, 494, 529, 566, 571, 592
529, 531, 534, 544, 691 sabhā, 109, 146, 151, 173, 189,
rāmakathā, 220–1 191, 239–41, 244, 661
Rāmapāla, 496–505, 512–13, 517, Sabhāparvan, 97, 120
519–21, 523, 529, 532, 534, Sadānīrā, 137
542, 572 saḍbhāga, 451, 526
Rāma-paṇḍita, 215–16 Sagara, 229–30, 252, 257, 260,
Rāmāvatī, 502 286, 630, 663
Rāmāyaṇa, 208–62, 283, 287, 370, Sāhilavarman, 635–7, 644, 646
429, 447, 490, 497–8, 502, 508, Said, E., 33
Index 753
Śaiva Pāśupata, 528 389, 391–2, 399–406, 409–17,
Śaivaśāstras, 608 419–20, 424, 426–8, 430,
Śaka, 77, 149, 198, 245, 296–7, 432–6, 438, 440–4, 446,
304, 335–6, 338, 348, 357, 397, 449–50, 454–8, 460–7, 506,
458, 486, 536, 556, 607, 634, 515, 518, 527, 534, 544, 600,
659, 662 651–2, 654, 659, 664, 666, 684,
Śākalya, 89 687–9, 694, 697
Sāketa, 215, 296, 459 Saṅghamittā, 425
Śākta, 306, 309, 531, 593–4, 631, Śaṅkaravarman, 614, 620, 622
637 Saṅkarṣaṇa, 620
Śākta-Śaktī, 591 Śantanu, 130–1, 152, 159, 175–6,
Śakuntalā, 174, 224, 370 179, 289, 448
Śākya, 69, 169, 216, 295, 363, Śānti parvan, 151, 189, 191, 199,
395–8, 408, 423, 425, 429, 311, 406, 447
447–52, 462, 490, 631, 659 Saoshyant, 443
Sālivāhana, 670 saptāṅga, 71, 194, 485, 566, 587
Sallakṣanavarman, 559, 568 saptaṛṣi, 179, 279, 301–2
sallekhanā, 676 Śāradā, 584, 586, 646
Sāma Jātaka, 214 Saraṅgadeva, 668
sāmanta, 388 Sarasvatī, 101, 137, 479–80
Samantapāsādikā, 416, 428 Śarmiṣṭha, 174, 176
Samba Purāṇa, 270 Sarnath, 322, 337
Śambara, 116–17 Sarvāstivada, 402, 445
Śambūka, 231 Sasana/śāsana, 406
Sambula Jātaka, 217 Śaśāṅka, 486, 488, 495, 520
saṃgrahītṛ, 128 Sassanians, 462
Saṁgrāmarāja, 615 Sātakarṇi Gautamiputra/Sātakaṇi
Saṃhitās, 89–90 Gotamiputta, 328, 476
samiti, 109 Śatānika Śatrajita, 126
Saṃkarṣaṇa, 337, 620 Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 56, 71, 94–5,
Samkṣobha, 346 98, 103–4, 106, 109–10, 112,
Samprati, 457, 664–5 118, 120–7, 130, 136–40, 146,
Sampratirājā-carita, 664 165, 174–5, 178, 184, 216, 245,
Samudra Gupta, 79, 258, 317, 266, 283, 285
340–2, 352, 357, 361, 368, 552, Sātavāhana, 255, 328–9, 331, 333,
612 339, 348, 476–7, 556
saṃvat, 560, 668, 680 satī, 340, 485, 572
Saṃyutta-nikāya, 384, 387, 428 Satyaputras, 327
Sanchi, 332 Satyāvatī, 152, 158
Sandhyākaranandin, 64, 479, Śaunaka, 130, 157, 159, 173
496–509, 542 Saurashtra/Saurāṣṭra, 117, 307,
Sandracottos, 20, 282, 364 335, 338, 361, 671
saṅgha, 185, 197–8, 257, 313, Sāyaṇa, 119, 485
326, 329, 332, 342, 382–7, Schelling, F., 29
754 Index
Schlegel, A.W., 29 Somaka, 116, 126
Schlegel, F., 28 Somanātha, 613, 627, 662, 671–2,
Schopenhauer, A., 29 674
Seleucus Nicator, 282, 324 Somavaṃśa, 250, 252, 670
Senge Namgyal, 432 Someśvara III, 539
Shahābuddin Muhammad, 78 Songtsen Gampo, 432
Shahnama/Shahnameh, 15 Spengler, O., 305
Shamanism, 15, 591 śramaṇas, 16, 198, 383, 457, 464,
Sher Shah, 572 658, 660, 686
Siddhahemacandra, 673 Śrauta-sūtras, 93
Siddharāja, 662, 668–9, 672, 674, Śrāvasti, 238, 382, 403
679 Śreṇika, 656, 659, 663, 665
Siddhārtha, 295, 397 śreṣṭhins, 573, 578, 589
siddhas, 512, 610, 636, 638, 678, Śrī, 374, 490, 493, 497, 499,
693 512–13, 517, 594, 674
Śīlacandra, 497 Sri Lanka, 63, 91, 210, 385, 388–9,
Silk Route, 348 391, 398, 402, 410, 414–41,
Sima Qian, 9, 19 449, 458, 461–3, 466–7, 516,
Siṁha samvat, 672 565, 689
Sindhu-Sauvīras, 189 Śrimālas, 270
Siṅhala/Sihala, 388, 391, 417–20, Śṛṅgāraprakāśa, 358, 376
424, 426, 429, 440, 462 Sṛñjayas, 116, 118, 127
Sihala-aṭṭhakathā-mahāvaṃsa, śrotriya, 93, 122, 512, 590
417 śruti, 146
Siri Sātakaṇi Gotamiputa, 328, Staal, F., 88–90
476 Stein, Aurel, 599, 601
Śiśunāga, 295, 361, 382 Sthala Purāṇas, 270, 606
Śiśupāla, 154, 172, 177, 260 Sthānviśvara/Thanesar, 478,
Sītā, 214–17, 221–4, 226, 229, 234, 482–3, 486–7, 511, 528
239, 245, 247, 252, 255, 288, Sthaviravāda, 401
397, 497, 512 sthavirāvalī-carita, 663–4
Skanda Gupta, 343 Strabo, 285, 384, 634
Skanda Purāna, 518, 629 stūpa, 62, 214, 321, 323, 331–4,
Skandasvāmin, 142 336, 409, 418, 420, 439, 454,
skandhāvāra, 481, 488, 502, 552 456, 477, 520, 610, 676
śleṣa, 497 stuti, 94, 99, 114
śloka, 226, 271, 629 Subhadrā, 175, 190
smṛti, 146, 303 Sudarśana lake, 338, 343, 351
Smith, Morton, 39, 268 Sudās Paijavana, 92, 126
Smith, V., 268, 272 Śuddhodhana, 419
Social Darwinism, 31 śūdra, 70, 74, 91, 105, 107, 125,
Sogdian, 391 141, 169, 187, 198, 218, 228,
Solaṅki, 670 231, 257, 295–6, 299, 305,
Somadevasūri, 660 310–11, 316, 361–3, 370–1,
Index 755
398–9, 425, 496, 511, 529, 553, Takṣaśilā, 335
575, 591, 620, 658, 690 Tālajaṅghas, 230
Sugandhā, 617 Taṃbapaṇi, 419
Sugrīva, 231, 246–7 tāmrapaṭṭas/tāmrapatras, 550
Suhma, 290 Tantrin, 614, 621–2
Śukra, 166, 193 Tantrism, 591
sūktas, 124 Tārā, 499
Sukthankar, V.S., 147–8, 150, Taraka, 492
160–2, 168 Tarkārikā, 566
Sultanates, 20, 81 Tejaḥpāla, 677
Sumaṅgalavilāsinī, 183, 216, Telugu, 47
395–6, 428–9 Ter, 335
Sumerian, 10, 285 Tessitori, L.P., 38
Sundarakāṇḍa, 221, 235 Thera Upagupta, 458
Śuṅga, 296, 298, 337, 354, 362, Thera Yaśas, 459
413, 431, 458–9, 486, 556, 659 Theravāda, 59, 386, 388–9, 391,
Śunaḥśepa, 125, 128–9, 131–3, 179 399, 401–2, 414, 416–22,
Śūrasena, 484 425–8, 430–1, 433, 436,
Surkh Kotal, 331 439–40, 445, 455, 516, 656,
Sūryavaṃśa, 151, 215, 230, 251, 689
258, 281, 283–4, 287–8, 290–1, theris, 446
295, 307–8, 310, 315, 347, 398, Thucydides, 10–11
408, 447–8, 474, 505, 513, 552, Thūpavaṃsa, 430
630, 644, 686 Tibetan, 391, 425, 431–2, 444–5,
sūta, 55, 94, 97–100, 128, 140–1, 448, 454, 461, 505, 612, 638–9,
153, 157–60, 164–5, 171, 695
173–4, 193, 228, 271–5, 277, ṭīkās, 541, 664
282, 316, 543 Tilak, B.G., 41
sūtradhāra, 365 tīrthaṅkaras, 249, 658–9, 663
Sutta Piṭaka, 387, 393, 448 Tissa Moggaliputta, 425, 445
Sutta-nipāta, 387, 444 tithi, 81, 139, 556
Suyya, 613, 620 Tod, J., 20, 38, 581
Śvapāka, 620 Tomara, 77–8, 582
Svapnavāsavadatta, 354 Traikūṭaka, 255
svayamvara, 153, 190, 199, 223, Trailokyavarman, 559, 570–1, 577
286, 339, 358, 474, 512 Trasadasyu, 116, 122, 175, 630
Śvetāmbara, 249, 652, 655, 657, Tretā yuga, 211, 247, 276
672, 677–8 Tribhuvanapāla, 668
Śyāvāśva, 94 Trilokanatha, 626
Tripuri, 255
T’ang, 543, 612 Triṣaṣṭiśalākāpuruṣa-carita, 662
Tabo, 627, 638 Tṛtsu, 95, 118–19
Tahqiq-i-Hind, 16 Tukhāra, 612
ṭākari, 646 Turnour, G., 415
756 Index
Turuṣka, 78, 296, 431, 506, 570, Vaiṣṇava Bhāgavatism, 530, 638,
611, 615, 644, 648, 662 659
Turvasa, 289 vaiśya, 74, 107, 121, 141, 237, 257,
Tuṣāśpa, 338 338, 371, 399, 480, 483, 495–6,
Tuṣita, 452 591, 658
Vaivasvat, 276, 279, 318
ucchvāsas, 479 Vajji, 382, 400
Ūdal, 583–5 Vajrayāna, 402, 534
udāsin, 520 Vākāṭaka, 345
Udayagiri, 361 Vākpati, 559–60, 562
Udayana, 354, 493 Valabhī, 483, 496, 655
udgātṛ, 110 Vālhanadevī, 559
Ugraśravas, 157–9, 173–4, 273 Vālin, 231, 246–7
Ujjain, 322, 348, 456 Vallabharāja, 668
Ulugh Khan, 669 Vālmīki, 60, 164, 209, 211–14,
Upagupta, 458, 676 220–50, 252–4, 261–2, 370,
upākhyāna, 272 447, 498, 585, 685–6, 694
Upāli, 400 Vāmana, 560
Upamaśravas, 115, 118 vaṃśa, 106–7, 205, 251–2, 269,
Upaniṣad, 56, 89–90, 97, 136, 162, 295, 312–13, 481, 511, 543, 553,
193, 383, 408, 459 633–5
Upa-Purāṇas, 270 vaṃśānucarita, 60, 258, 265–318,
Uparicara, 178 344, 347, 353, 398, 411, 417,
upāsakas/upāsikas, 336, 410, 467 448, 508, 554–5, 575, 589, 606,
Urvaśī, 108, 129, 133–4, 179, 289, 608, 630, 633, 686, 692, 694,
480 696, 698–9
Utilitarianism, 27 Vaṃsatthappakāsinī, 363, 416,
utsarpinii, 257 425, 429
Uttarakāṇḍa, 222, 226 vaṃśāvalī, 597–650
Uttarakurus, 612 Vanarāja, 338, 670
Vānaravaṃśa, 251
Vāc, 96 Vaṅga, 290
Vaghelas, 666, 669 Varadarāja, 247
Vaikuṇṭha, 561 Varahamihira, 677
Vaiśāli, 233, 238, 382, 400–1, Varcin, 116
403, 419, 439, 453, 464, varendra-maṇḍala, 503
654 Varmapura, 631
Vaiśampāyana, 156–7, 159, 174, varṇasaṃkara, 274
606 varṇāśramadharma, 70, 171, 315,
Vaiṣṇavas, 168, 211, 231, 242–3, 405–6, 481, 492, 511, 518, 525,
248, 253, 255, 280, 306, 313, 529, 535, 564, 654, 657, 690
443, 458, 483, 495, 513, 528, Varuṇa, 96, 131
530, 534, 556, 561, 564, 595, Vāsiṣṭhiputra Pulumāvi, 334
606, 620, 636, 638, 642, 659 Vassakara, 183, 403
Index 757
Vāstavya, 569, 574–5, 590 Vikramāṅkadevacarita, 509, 532,
Vastupāla, 652, 677 568, 646
Vastupāla-Tejaḥpāla praśasti, Vikramaśīlā, 527
652 Vima Khadphises, 331
Vāsudeva, 77, 185, 252, 255, 335, Vimalasūri, 209, 248–9, 255–6,
337, 423, 552, 663 655
Vasudevahiṇḍi, 659, 664 vināgāthins, 123–4, 165
Vatsa, 125, 292, 354, 374, 480 Vinaya Piṭaka, 387, 399–400, 403,
Vātsyāyana, 480 416, 428
Vaṭṭagāmaṇi Abhaya, 427 Vindhyavāsinī, 270
Vāyu, 115, 266, 270, 272 Vīravarmadeva, 571
Vāyu Purāṇa, 480 Vīravarman, 559, 568, 570–2
Vedas, 22, 29, 32, 45, 55–8, 67, 69, Viśākhadatta, 342
87–143, 146, 148, 151, 158–9, Viśāla Deva, 342
168, 170, 175, 193–5, 198, 202, Visānins, 116
204, 245, 265–7, 271–2, 274, Viṣṇu, 77, 147, 151, 156, 160, 162,
276, 279, 284, 308, 346, 387, 168, 171, 193, 203, 205, 211,
392, 399, 412, 480, 487, 538, 220, 222–4, 242–3, 258, 266,
567, 666 270, 279–80, 283–4, 297, 306,
Vena, 179–180, 195, 288, 298, 314–15, 335, 339, 345, 356, 458,
330 461, 497, 504–5, 517, 530, 532,
Vessantara Jātaka, 444, 456 534–5, 551, 560–1, 563–4, 570,
Vetāla, 485, 611 594, 608, 613, 637–8, 640, 654,
Veyne, P., 11, 45 663
Vibhīṣaṇa, 231 Viṣṇu Purāṇa, 22, 184, 265–318,
Vicitravīrya, 175, 190 398, 411, 461, 511, 532, 561–2,
Vico, 14 608–9, 629, 686, 699
Vidarbha, 256, 345 Viṣṇudharmottara Purāṇas, 606
Videgha Māthava, 138, 216, Viṣṇugupta, 360, 362
396 Visudhimagga, 428
Videha, 126, 135, 137–8, 215, 227, Viśvakarman, 583
287–8, 292 Viśvāmitra, 125, 132–3
Vidiśā, 256, 296, 456 Vīṭāśoka, 453
Viḍūḍbha, 219 Vītāśokāvadāna, 453
Vidyādharavaṃśa, 251 Vitasta-māhātmya, 606
Vigrahapāla-deva, 505 Voltaire, 27–8
Vijaya, 418–19, 422–3, 435, 465 Vrātya, 95, 97–8, 164, 198, 245,
Vijayapāla, 559, 566–7 275, 295, 307, 309, 338, 398
Vijayaśakti, 559–60, 562 Vṛjji, 71, 169, 183, 382, 395, 449,
Vijayavarman, 639 453, 464
vijigīṣu, 520, 530 vṛṣala, 370, 373
Vijjāka, 560 Vṛṣṇi, 151, 154, 156, 173, 177–8,
Vikrama saṃvat, 560, 668, 680 182, 190, 337, 663
Vikramāditya VI, 532 Vṛtra, 212
758 Index
Vyāghraketu, 489 Yama, 481
Vyāghrapalli, 677 Yaśaḥpāla, 566
Vyāsa, 146–8, 152–3, 156–9, 164, Yaśas, 455, 459
175, 229, 271–3, 316, 479, 500, Yāska, 55, 57, 89, 91, 96, 103, 105,
585 116, 125, 130, 142, 159, 266
vyavahāra-dharma, 192 Yaśovarmadeva, 565
Yaśovarman, 559–60, 562–4, 570,
Wang-hsuan-ts’e, 543 574, 589, 594
Weber, M., 32–6, 434, 682 Yaśovarman II, 559, 570, 574
Wilson, H.H., 22, 26, 37, 267, 275, Yaudheyas, 338–9
607 Yavana, 81–2, 149, 245, 296–8,
Wu Zetian, 454 309, 314, 329, 335, 458, 504,
640–1, 649, 662
Xandrames, 364 Yayāti, 103, 146, 155, 172, 174–8,
Xuanzang, 37, 493, 510, 513, 289, 448, 562
516–17, 526, 538, 607 Yerragudi, 322
yogīs, 631, 636–8, 678, 693
Yadu, 102–3, 116, 151, 155, 172, Yona, 325, 327, 335
174–7, 186, 230, 259–61, Yuddhakāṇḍa, 221–2
288–92, 298, 307, 330, 347, 504, Yudhiṣṭhira, 146, 154, 165, 169,
670 182–3, 187, 190–2, 194–5, 199
yajamāna, 72, 95, 103, 107, 110, yuga, 139, 203–6, 211, 247, 269,
120, 128, 188, 282 276, 297–8, 301–3, 306, 308,
yajña, 89, 100, 105, 109–11, 114, 314, 329, 698
116, 120–7, 140, 146, 154, 184, Yuga Purāṇa, 298, 314, 329
188–9, 199–200, 222, 235, 246, Yugākāra, 637–9
277, 406, 494, 553, 582, 606
Yajur, 89 Zayn-al-‘Ābidin, 625
Yakkhas/yakṣas, 173, 418, 427, 465 Zoroastrian, 15, 443, 459
