OXFORD INDIA PAPERBAC KS
1
4
rade, Ideology
j
and Urban ization
South India 300 BC to AD 1300
TS oe ote
if aur
f
Tr tu bs
——w o e. bar
R
.Champakalakshmi
pene |N OF A T I I N O D N I A A L U L N A I W V ER S S C I H T O Y OL !
BENGALURU
ren
Ple f a o s r e ma r n e y m em o b th e e r r t u h s a e t r s t hi l s ik e r e y s o o u u , r c S e o i d s o m n e o a t n t
tamper, tear or
damage.
respon W s e i bi b l e i l t i y e ve t o t c h a a t r e it f o i r s a li n b r i a n r d y i v d i o d c ua u l m ents
and other reso urces of
institution.
Ple y a o s u e h d a o v e c h t e o c c k o m b p ef e o n r s e a t y e o u if b t o h r e r o m w a , t e b ri e a c l a u i s s e
returned in a
damaged
condition.
4
Trade, Ideology and Urbanization

Tadpridediey
and Urbanization
South India 300 BC to AD 1300
R. Champakalakshmi
UNIVERSITY PRESS
van ised,
lAnoroy 7:
~ oO {esieensity press
Oxford New York
Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi Kuala Lumpur
Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto
With offices in
Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece Guatemala
Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore South Korea Switzerland
Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam
Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press
in the UK and in certain other countries
Published in India
by Oxford University Press, New Delhi
© Oxford University Press 1996
The moral rights of the author have been asserted
Database right Oxford University Press (maker)
First published 1996
Oxford India Paperbacks 1999
Second impression 2010
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopying, recording or by any information storage and
retrieval system, without permission in writing from Oxford University Press.
Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the above should be
sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the address above
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
ISBN-13: 978-0-19-564875-1
ISBN-10: 0-19-564875-7
Printed in India at Anvi Composers, New Delhi 1100063
_ Published by Oxford University Press
YMCA Library Building, Jai Singh Road, New Delhi 110001
For
Jayee, Radha and Vanaja

Preface
I: the course of my explorations of historical sites in the
river valleys of Tamil Nadu, early in my teaching career, I
was struck by the size and monumental architecture of Pallava-
Cola centres like Kumbhakonam (Kaveri Valley), Kaficipuram
(Palar Valley) and Ambasamudram (Tamraparni Valley). Despite
some differences, they attracted attention due to their long
historical past, development of enduring institutions like the
temple and centuries of evolution into huge temple towns in
medieval times. A nagging and compelling thought that such
centres need to be studied not only for their striking visibility
as towns/cities but more importantly as a part of the processes
of urban development in pre-modern India, pursued me espe-
cially as urban processes had not received the attention that
was due. In the late seventies my interest grew and ideas were
refined which instigated a close look at urbanization and the
city.
Hence began a most stimulating series of exercises in
trying to understand the urban processes and the character
of the city in early medieval South India (ap 600-1300),
starting from Kumbhakonam, to Kaficipuram and Tafyjavur,
their hinterlands and role as prime movers in the shaping
of the politico-economic and cultural configurations of this
region. Better perspectives on early medieval urbanism emerged
when a comparative study was made with the early historical
period. (300 Bc-ap 300). Early historical urbanism was shown
to have significant differences in urban form and experience,
with maritime trade and external links dominating the urban
process and with urban centres developing along South India’s
long coastline but lacking institutional foci like the temple.
This book is the end result of forays into these two
periods of urbanization. Of the present collection of eight
essays, six are revised and enlarged versions of published
ones (see list on p. viii), while the other two have been
viii / Pre ace
written for this volume together with an introduction setting
out its aim and formulations.
14 May 1996 R. CHAMPAKALAKSHMI
List of Published Essays
1. ‘Growth of Urban Centres in South India: Kudamukku-Palatyarai,
the Twin-city of the Célas’, in Studies in History, vol. 1, no. 1,
January-June 1979. (Chapter 6 in this volume).
2. ‘Urbanization in Medieval Tamil Nadu’, in Situating Indian History
for Sarvepalli Gopal, Sabyasachi Bhattacharya and Romila Thapar
(eds), OUP, Delhi, 1986. (Chapter 4 1n this volume).
3. ‘Urbanisation in South India: The Role of Ideology and Polity’,
Presidential Address, Ancient India Section, /mdian History Con-
gress, 47th Session, Srinagar, 1986. (Chapter 1 in this volume).
4. ‘Tanjavur, the Ceremonial City of the Colas’, in /ndian Archaeologt-
cal Heritage, K.V. Soundararajan Felicitation Volume, II, C. Marga-
bandhu, K.S. Ramachandran, A.P. Sagar and D.K. Sinha (eds),
Agam, Delhi, 1991. (Chapter 8 in this volume).
5. ‘Urban Configurations of Tondaimandalam: The Kaficipuram
Region, c. aD 600-1300’, in Urban Form and Meaning in South Asia
(Studies in the History of Art, 31), Howard Spodek and Doris
Meth Srinivasan (eds), National Gallery of Art, Washington D.C.,
1993. (Chapter 7 in this volume).
6. ‘Medieval South Indian Guilds: Their Role in Trade and Ur-
banisation, in Society and Ideology in India, Essays in Honour of
Professor R.S. Sharma, D.N. Jha (ed.), Manohar, Delhi, 1996.
(Chapter 5 in this volume).
Acknowledgemen ts
I: is to Professor Romila Thapar that I owe this book, in
which I have put together my essays on urbanization in South
India, an endeavour, which I would not have undertaken but
for her suggestion and constant assurance that the essays stand
together due to their thematic unity and common framework.
My thanks are due to Professor Shereen Ratnagar, my friend
and colleague, who willingly spared long hours of her time
discussing some of my problems in dealing with the concept
of urbanism and urban processes. My colleague Dr Neeladri
Bhattacharya has in many ways helped in the organization and
presentation of the volume.
My special thanks are due to Professors Atiya Habib Kidwai
and K.S. Sivasami of the Centre for the study of Regional
Development (CSRD), Jawaharlal Nehru University, for making
available to me maps of South India for preparing the base
maps for the cartographic illustrations in the book. To Mr
Akilesh Mathur, the Cartographer in CSRD, I express my sincere
thanks for doing the maps in a remarkably short time for the
publication. These maps are based on earlier versions prepared
by Messrs A.N. Sharma, Deshpande and Dr Sudhir Malakar. Y.
Subbarayalu’s work on the Political Geography of the Chola
country has been of immense value in the location of nadus
and kottams in the maps.
For the illustrations in the chapter on Tafyavur, I am indebted
to the Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts, especially
its Academic Adviser Dr Kapila Vatsyayan, for providing me
with the relevant photographs and slides on the Tafjavur temple.
Dr M.C. Joshi, Member secretary, IGNCA and Ms Krishna
Dutt, in charge of the project on Tafijavir were extremely helpful
to me in choosing the best in their collection.
The map on the Tamraparni valley urban core (Map 8) 1s
an adaptation from the map of this region published in R.
Tirumalai’s book Rajendra Vinnagar. To Mr N. Sethuraman of
x y Acknowledgements
Kumbhak6nam, I am grateful for the Map of the town in
1980, which has been suitably modified for the. chapter (Map
12) on this centre. The ground plan of the Varadarajasvami
temple in Kaficipuram follows closely the one published in
Dr K.V. Raman’s book Sn Varadarajaswami Temple Kana: A
study of its History, Art and Architecture.
My grateful thanks are also due to Mr Venkatesh Naik,
research student in the centre for Historical Studies, J.N.U., who
prepared the index to this volume and to Mrs Choodamani
Venugopal and Mrs Kameswari Viswanatham for typing the
Manuscript.
It is with great pleasure that I express my thanks to the
Oxford University Press, New Delhi, for not only publishing
the book with remarkable speed but also for doing it well.
Contents
Maps and Illustrations
Abbreviations
Introduction
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview
Stimulus from Outside: Urbanization in the
Early Historical Period c. 300 Bc to aD 300
External Trade: Evidence from Early Tamil Texts
Developments Within: Urban Processes in the
Early Medieval Period c. ap 600 to 1300 203
The South Indian Guilds: Their Role in Early
Medieval Trade and Urbanization
Imperial Power and Urban Growth: Kudamutkku®
Palaiyarai: The Twin Cities of the Colas 331
The City and the Hinterland: Kaficipuram and
Tondaimandalam 371
Urbanization from Above: Tafjavir, the
424
Ceremonial City of the Colas
442
Bibliography
462
Inde
Maps
Urban Centres; Early Historical Tamilakam 156
Tamil Nadu - The Urban Process: Period |
(ap 600 - 850)
240
Tamil Nadu - The Urban Process: Period II
(ap 850 - 985) 241
Tamil Nadu - The Urban Process: Period III
(ap 985 - 1150)
242
Tamil Nadu - The Urban Process: Period IV
(aD 1150 - 1250) 243
Tamil Nadu - The Urban Process: Period V
244
(ap 1250 - 1350)
245
Tamil Nadu - Urban Configurations ap 1300
246
The Tamraparni Valley: Urban Core
The Kaveri Delta - The Hinterland of
Kudamukku-Palaiyarai: The Urban Core 367
Kudamukku-Palatyarai 368
Kumbhakonam 369
Kumbhakonam in 1980 370
Tondaimandalam ap 1300: Urban Configurations 419
Kaficipuram AD 1300: The Hinterland 420
Kaficipuram: The City 421
The Madras Region ap 1300 422
Ground Plan of the Varadarajasvami Temple,
423
Kaficipuram
441
Ground Plan of RajarajeSvaram, Tanjavur
Lllustrations
(Between pages 430 and 431)
Vimana, Tanjavar Temple
Tripurantaka on the Vimdna wall
Tanjai Alagar (Tripurantaka) Bronze Tafjavir Art Gallery
BwWNr
Tripurantaka. Fresco in the inner ambulatory of the
Vimdana
Abbreviations
Annual Report on (South) Indian Epigraphy
Black and Red Ware
Indian Antiquary
Indian Archaeology A Review
International Association of Tamil Research
Indian Economic and Socal History Review
Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts
Indian History Congress
Indian Histoncal Review
Indian Institute of Research in Numismatic Studies
Journal of Asian Studies
Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient
Journal of Indian History
Korkai
Northern Black Polished (Ware)
New Series
Oxford University Press
Punch Marked Coins
Radio Carbon
Russet Coated Painted (Ware)
South Indian Inscriptions
South India Saiva Siddhanta Works
Transactions of the Archaeological Society of South India
Urban History Association of India

Introduction
| and the city have been the focus of scholarly
attention among social scientists despite the elusive char-
acter of urban theory and definition of the city. Attempts have
been made to evolve perspectives of urbanism and urbanization
from the simplest of explanatory criteria for urban centres to
complex theoretical formulations to understand urban processes
in their spatial and temporal diversity and in a variety of
socio-historical contexts.
One of the major questions, which has been posed by these
exercises, is whether it is the form of urbanism or the substance
which characterizes it that should be the focus of analysis. The
tendency of attributing analytical significance to the form at
the expense of the substance seems to have been influenced by
the powerful impact that the western industrial city has as a
‘social form’ in which ‘the essential properties of larger systems
are grossly concentrated and intensified’.'
The impact of the western city has also led to a sharp distinc-
tion being made in the studies of western and Asian cities, the
western cities as symbols of economic vitality? and political
autonomy, and the Asian cities or urban forms as predominantly
political and cultural rather than economic phenomena.’ Recent
research has pointed out that this dichotomy ts as hallowed as
the contrast between town and country.’ The second major
question often raised in urban studies is that of the validity of
the conceptual separation between the town and the country,
i.e. that of a dual economy, the rural and the urban. This duality
is now being abandoned except as a ‘social division of labour
in the larger whole’.’ The inseparability of the town from the
larger social environment is stressed and towns are regarded as
sites in which the history of larger social systems—states, societies,
modes of production, world economies—is partially but crucially
worked out.®
Similarly, the validity of treating the town as a distinctive
2 y2 Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
social structure, i.e. a special entity having a structural autonomy
or as ‘a focus of analysis in its own right’, is now largely rejected
and instead, urban analysis ‘through a broader societal analysis’
or as ‘a part of the analysis of those broad socio-economic
changes with which history is concerned’,’ has gained general
acceptance. Hence, in the more recent works on urban history
and the city, the central concern has been urbanization, 1.e. the
processes of urban growth leading to the rise of the city. In
other words, urbanism is perceived as the product of societal
change, the manifestation of certain economic and social systems
at work, as exemplified by the temple cities of South India,
which are marked out by their form and role in society as both
physical and social objects.
It is the above approach to urban studies that 1s adopted in
the present volume. In addition, other significant and influential
concepts relating to the city and urban forms have also been
found relevant to the study of urbanization in premodern South
India.
Typology has been an important though ‘orthodox’® device
in urban analysis both among historians and sociologists.
The best known among typologies is the classic distinction
made by G. Sjoberg’ between the industrial and pre-industrial
cities, which would seem to coincide with the distinction
sociologists make between cities in traditional and modern
societies. Sjoberg’s is a useful distinction but is only a ‘con-
structed type’, no homogeneity or uniformity in structural
pattern being implied for the pre-industrial city. There is
no ‘one basic language’ as Fernand Braudel pointed out,
‘for all cities of the world within their very depths’.'®
The orthogenetic and heterogenetic cities, a model introduced
by Robert Redfield and Milton Singer," has influenced studies
of traditional and colonial/modern cities as seen in Susan
Lewandowsky’s study of Madurai and Madras.'? Colonialism
has often provided a visible marker for differentiating the cities
in Asia as traditional (orthogenetic) and colonial (heterogenetic).
The impact of colonialism has been so overrated as to be able
to explain a ‘drastic’ change in the urbanism of India, China
and Southeast Asian countries. With colonialism, the western
kind of city is believed to have been imported. This would seem
Patoduction J 3
to be an incredibly simple explanation of the emergence of new
types of cities, where the physical structure and composition of
the city change due to the heterogeneity of ethnic and cultural
groups. The real question, however, is how far was it a metamor-
phosis and how far, if at all, did it affect the internal (core)
aspects of the local cultures, i.e. the pre-existing forms and
structures. That no uniformity can be recognized in the colonial
context is pointed out by studies on colonial towns in South
India, which stress the importance of understanding pre-existing
forms.'? Some of these pre-existing structures are the main
concern of the present volume.
Furthermore, the orthogenetic and heterogenetic cities are
not exclusive to traditional and modern cities respectively, as
has been shown by the neo-Weberian approach of Eisenstadt
and Shachar,"* who distinguish between forces of centrality and
those of concentration operating in different periods and dif-
ferent socio-historical contexts. A similar distinction is made by
Howard Spodek in what he calls a nodal vision or pers;ective
for heterogenetic centres and a palimpsest, i.e. stability within
indigenous culture for orthogenetic centres of urban activity.
Spodek tries to evolve this distinction on the basis of a study
made by several scholars of cities in South Asia ranging from
early historical Taxila to modern/colonial Madras."
Typologies or distinctions in city-types are also made within
specific historical contexts and are often attributed to factors
to which a certain primacy is given as causative or innovative,
leading to types such as political/administrative centres, military
centres, trade or commercial centres, religious centres and so
on. While this is common in the conventional economic
histories, it persists in more recent works on urbanism,'* which
lay stress on the causative role of certain factors. However, in
the long period of social and economic change generating
urban forms, an elaborate complex of factors is mingled in a
processual change. Agricultural expansion and intensification
is often a necessary pre-condition to change in which improved
technology, e.g. irrigation, is a major resource. Social division
of labour, productive labour and surplus, storage of surplus,
institutional mechanism for surplus extraction, large-scale com-
munal and monumental activity, a complex social organization
4/ Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
and a well-developed power structure contribute to the forma-
tion of cities. Population increase, competition for land, warfare
and tribute are recognised as the outward manifestation of
urbanism, particularly in early cities.'’ Stable systems of trade,
artisans and merchants as permanent community fixtures,
specialization of crafts, transport innovations,”® all of which
are often cited as urban forms, would seem to operate in
different degrees and at different levels in the evolution of
urban centres. Thus, causative factors may occur in different
orders of primacy in creating distinctive types. While economic
factors are basic to urban growth, often what is required is a
focal point for mobilization and redistributive activities, which,
in pre-modern societies, was often provided by an ideology,
usually religious. As Paul Wheatley” points out:
It is doubtful if any single autonomous causative factor will ever be
identified in the nexus of social, economic and political transforma-
tions which resulted in the emergence of urban forms, but one activity
does seem in a sense to command a sort of priority. Whatever structural
changes in social organization were induced by commerce, warfare,
or technology, they needed to be validated by some instrument of
authority if they were to achieve institutional permanence.
Given the diversity of the phenomena called ‘urban’ Wheat-
ley’s characterization of the concept of urbanism ‘as com-
pounded of a series of sets of ideal type social, political,
economic and other institutions which have combined in
different ways in different cultures and at different times’,”°
is significant. In other words, urban studies should be situated
in specific socio-historical contexts in terms of their spatial
and temporal spread.
Urban sociologists would treat towns as fields of social power
as an alternative framework of analysis, i.e. towns as social
realization of power, stressing the continuity of social stratifica-
tion between town and country. Power and the pattern of
domination have been the main concerns in the discussion of
towns by Weber, Braudel and even Sjoberg, who see the town
internally and externally as an institutional expression of
power.’! Following Weber, Philip Abrams uses what he calls the
complex of domination” for a better understanding of the
Introduction 4 5
nature and functions of towns in a larger social context, i.e. a
struggle to constitute and elaborate power.”
Weber’s concept of ‘non-legitimate domination’ appeared
crucial for the medieval European town where the burghers
usurped power in pursuit of rational economic action, freed
from the dependence on the ‘legitimate’ (feudal) authorities
and in turn established dominance over artisans and peasants.
This, it is believed, was conducive to the building of the
cultural and economic base for the emergence of capitalism.”*
These ‘non feudal islands in the feudal seas’ have been char-
acterized as the primary source of change and economic growth
towards capitalism.”
On the contrary, more recent research looks at the rise of
towns as a process internal to the feudal system and medieval
towns are considered as integral elements of it.* The persistence
of feudal patterns of social control within towns, it is argued,
acted as a disincentive to economic innovation, pointing out
the rural rather than urban origins of capitalism.””
In India, the feudalism theory as applied to the study of the
land grant system and polity and society in the early medieval
period and the continuing debate on the validity of the concept
in the context of several regional studies, especially that of South
India, have raised several questions, one of which is related to
the emergence of a burgher class creating a situation of ‘non-
legitimate domination’. No burgher class seems to have emerged
in India which confronted the existing patterns of rural and
urban overlordship, as one may recognize in the nature of the
nagarattar or merchants of South India, whose market towns
were complementary to the agrarian regions, of which they were
markets, and not opposed to them.”
In the study of urban processes, another useful distinction
is that of primary and secondary urbanization. In primary
urbanization the rise of cities is solely the result of internal
developments, although not in complete isolation, for external
influence in varying degrees could induce such development as
in Shang China and to some extent in Mesopotamia and Central
America2’ Wheatley would see the character of Chinese cities
as a distinct independent development-—t.c. sui generis—or a pro-
cess of generation and not imposition of urban forms.”°
6 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Secondary urbanization is the direct outgrowth of the expan-
sion of empire, wherein forts and regional administrative centres,
established for political and economic control, could act as
centres of diffusion of metropolitan culture, i.e. technology and
other knowledge. The workings of the sophisticated administra-
tive and technological structure of the conquering society pro-
vide the skills to the locals, helping them to ultimately to assert
their independence. This appears to be directly relevant to
colonial history which provides examples of secondary ur-
banism. Apart from the relevance of secondary urbanization in
a colonial context, it would also be interesting and pertinent to
see whether the expansion of early empires like that of the
Mauryas, characterized as a metropolitan state,*' induced secon-
dary urbanism in regions like the Deccan and Andhra, where,
in the post-Mauryan period, Mauryan influence both in ad-
ministrative structures and trading networks would seem to have
been predominant.” It would also appear then that primary
and secondary urbanization are representative of the same pro-
cesses as those of the formation of pristine and secondary states
of Morton Fried.*?
In secondary urbanization there is either a process of genera-
tion inspired by the extension of empire, or direct imposition
of urban forms, i.e. organizational patterns developed by the
conquering state. Wheatley uses this distinction to explain the
establishment of early Chinese style settlements in a colonial
context in Sine-Viet territories as urban imposition, and the
internally induced restructuring of society in the ‘Indianized’
realms of mainland Southeast Asia as urban generation,™ al-
though of the secondary form.
The city’s role as a locus for change,?5 the city as the focus
of power and dominance, and the city as an organizing principle
or creator of ‘effective space’,** have been the most influential
paradigms in the concept of the ceremonial centre, admirably
worked out by Paul Wheatley” for early Chinese cities and
subsequently applied to Southeast Asia (Angkor) and Sri Lanka
(Anuradhapura).8
It is in working out the concept of the ceremonial centre
that a religious ideology and the institutions that were evolved
to create ‘effective space’ and to constitute and elaborate power,
Introduction Vy, 7
became the main issues in the study of ‘pre-industrial’ or
traditional cities. It is by no means implied here that religion
was a primary causative factor. Rather it was one which, as in
the Mesopotamian case, ‘permeated all activities, all institu-
tional change and afforded a consensual focus for social life
which manifested itself in all cult centres’? Religion became
the focal point for collection and redistribution of resources
and religious centres had their granaries and records of ac-
counts.” The control over such institutions was taken into the
hands of the priestly-cum-ruling elite as economic admini-
strators and, thus, religious authority and political and social
power became inseparable. Massive constructions like palaces
(China), tombs (Islamic centres) and tem les (India) undertaken
at the ceremonial centres were beyond the power of local
groups. They are symbols of the concentration of social and
political power derived from a sacrally sanctioned authority.*'
It may be pointed out that the power structure developed by
the brahmana-ksatnya elite controlling the ceremonial centre in
South India, where political and religious authority is poorly
discriminated, is an important illustration.
The ceremonial complex receives central importance in the
emergence of urban forms and in the shaping of pre-modern
(pre-industrial) cities in studies on urban historical geography.
In his study of West Asian cities, Harold Carter’? makes urban
history space and period specific, related to locations where
urban spatial history and urban historical geography overlap
and merge. The approach to urban historical geography 1s
through the city as artefact and spatial patterning as the central
theme. Spatial pattern is the consequence rather than the central
focus in urban history. However, the city and its patterning can
provide the evidence for interpreting attitudes and ideology.
Here, religion is not given primacy as the single cause, but as
providing a focus, a validating instrument for urban institutions.
Religion does not mean the mere existence of beliefs in the
other world and cult practices, which admittedly precede urban
beginnings. It is that point of development in which a formalised
system of beliefs and practices, with claims to universalism, plays
a significant part in the process of transformation, requiring me-
diation through worship and sacrifice,” 1.¢. through institutional
8 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
means, and enables a certain politico-religious elite to command
priority and exercise authority. As Eisenstadt points out, in the
progression of various technological and other factors, a catalyst
led to a metamorphosis of the older kin-structured tribal or-
ganization into a Class based one—such as the temple, fortress or
market place. In South India, such a change may be perceived
from the early historical urbanism to the early medieval ur-
banism, the early medieval temple assuming the institutional
focus.
The basic modes of symbolism used in the process of
working out the concept of the ceremonial centre are adopted
by Wheatley from the work of Mircea Eliade.* These are the
imitation of celestial archetype, parallelism between macrocosm
and microcosm, participation in the symbolism of the centre,
technique of orientation to define the sacred territory within
the continuum of ‘profane’ space involving an emphasis on
the cardinal compass directions.
Some form of centralization of control over labour and land,
as well as all kinds of produce, is taken to be an invariable
component in the rise of the ceremonial centres. The main
functions of such centres were those of redistribution, the
movement of commodities being towards the centre, the ap-
propriative role being implicit in the physical disposition, as
well as the organization of the shrine. The crystallization of
urban forms also brought into existence at the same time the
earliest state institutions.© To a considerable extent this is
illustrated by the early medieval urban forms and state institu-
tions of the Tamil macro region.
II
Three major periods of urbanization have been identified in
pre-medieval (pre-Sultanate) India. The first is represented by
the proto-historic cities of the Harappan/Indus Valley culture
assignable to a long period from the middle of the third
millennium to the middle of the second millennium sc. The
urban character of this phase is recognizable in a hierarchy of
settlement sites, in the planned cities, in the urban infrastructure
Introduction of 9
provided at Mohenjo-daro, their design, monumental architec-
ture and orientation, apart from other significant archaeological
evidence. This culture was, however, confined to the Indus
region, spilling over into other geographical regions of the
subcontinent and interacting with other cultures. The major
part of the subcontinent remained unaffected by this early
urbanism, which, in fact, left no legacy beyond the middle of
the second millennium Bc.
The second period of urbanism, the epicentre of which is
located in the Ganges valley, was spread over a long period,
from the middle of the first millennium sc to the third cen-
tury AD, and is often attributed to the maturity of the iron age
and the expansion of trade within the Ganges valley, and from
the Ganges valley to other parts of India, covering almost the
whole of the subcontinent.*”’ In the Ganges valley, this phase of
urbanism was one of primary generation, i.e. a process of
internal development. Its impact in peninsular India may be
seen as generating urban forms due to the spread of trade and
commercial activities from the Ganges valley. More significant
in peninsular India was the impact of maritime trade. In the
Deccan and Andhra regions this period is understood to be one
of secondary urban generation and secondary state formation,
which became two inter-related processes induced by the expan-
sion of the Mauryan empire.** While this general assumption
appears to be valid in terms of political processes in the Deccan
and Andhra in the post-Mauryan times, the generation and
nature of secondary urbanism in these regions is yet to be
substantiated on the basis of detailed studies of towns from the
Mauryan to the Iksvaku periods (third century sc to third
century AD), both in the Ganges valley and peninsular India.
Regional variations in this phase of urbanism are crucial to an
understanding of the degree and intensity of secondary urban
forms in Tamilakam, where the impact of Indo-Roman trade
was greater and the influence of Mauryan polity was minimal.
For peninsular India, this phase represents the first urbaniza-
tion, which is better understood through regional and sub-
regional studies, although commonalties may exist across
regions. Only a beginning has been made in this direction, 1.¢.
in the understanding of urban processes in regional contexts.
10 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Much of the Andhra and Deccan areas, studded with various
types of settlements, is yet to be researched from the standpoint
of urbanization. The study of settlement patterns, 1.e. historical
geography, is a necessary step towards this understanding and
a few works have been undertaken based on such an approach.
For Tamilakam, in the early historical period, the study of
settlement patterns, ecology and forms of production has
demonstrated the need for such an approach and provided
useful insights into the nature of economy and urban forms.”
The Deccan and Tamilakam illustrate contrastive urban ex-
periences, particularly in the emergence of trading patterns.
Larger networks, guild organization of merchants and craftsmen,
which facilitated a more intensive and organized commerce,
marked the new economic system of the Deccan, to which were
integrated several centres of craft production in a situation where
trade was not stimulated by an agricultural surplus but by supply
of manufactured items. It was this factor which sustained some
of the central Deccan settlements, as a recent study shows on
the basis of archaeological data. The segmented nature of politi-
cal power of the pre-Satavahana times changed under the new
forces of Ganges valley urbanism and Mauryan polity, enabling
interaction between traders and craft production in areas under
the control of tribal communities. Attention is drawn to dif-
ferences in the character of settlements in central, southern and
western Deccan and Andhra region (eastern Deccan) in such
studies.°' Thus, the need for studying sub-regional patterns is
partially met by these works. The Andhra region still remains
largely unexplored from this point of view.
Notwithstanding such basic differences in the nature of
settlements, a major thesis by R.S. Sharma on urban decay
and de-urbanization in post third century AD in the whole of
the subcontinent treats the early historical settlements as homo-
geneous, 1.e. makes no distinction between rural or urban basis
of economic activities in them, nor tries to identify the
functionally different character of crafts and trade centres. That
such a homogeneity did not exist may be illustrated with the
help of several sites in the Tamil region (as in other regions
of the peninsula), where similarity in artefacts/material culture
in different contexts, like Megalithic sites, inland and coastal
Introduction if 11
settlements, cannot be construed as evidence of urbanism or
its decline. The problems with this theory of de-urbanization
and its consequences in relation to Tamilakam are discussed
in greater detail in the next section (Section III).
According to this theory of urban decay, the climax of the
early historical urbanism is to be located between 300 Bc and
AD 300, and an overall decline may be recognized in the ar-
chaeological evidence of the early historical sites. A long period
of de-urbanization is believed to have set in during the Gupta
and post-Gupta times (aD 300 to aD 1000), the first stage, third
to sixth centuries AD, representing a transition, and the second
stage, seventh to tenth centuries AD, a new socio-economic for-
mation. The prime causal factor in urban decay is traced to the
decline of long-distance (maritime) trade, 1.e. Indo-Roman trade
and trade with Southeast Asia, by the third century aD, and the
manifestations of the decline are seen in the absence of Roman
coins after third century AD, a general paucity of coins as well
as the poor nature of archaeological remains of the Gupta period
in the northern sites.*? Literary and epigraphic evidence is also
sought in the lack of references in inscriptions to artisans and
traders and the latters’ participation in administration, of forecast
of bad days for the artisans and merchants in literary texts and
references in foreign accounts to desertion of towns, especially
Buddhist centres, by travellers like Fa Hsien and Hsuan Tsang.”
Sharma’s emphasis on urban decay is significant especially be-
cause an attempt is made to establish a causal link between urban
decay and the emergence of feudalism, with a ruralization of the
economy. A series of changes is related to this decline, such as
ecological changes in the Ganges valley, the social upheaval
associated with the Kali age of the Puranas first occurring in the
third and fourth centuries and subsequently in the seventh-eighth
centuries, land grants or grants of villages and even towns as
fiefs in an all pervasive land grant system, which feudalized the
economy, including the towns where even merchants and artisans
were transferred to the beneficiary of the grant. Other conse-
quences of the decline which are enumerated are the migration
of artisans and brabmanas from towns, localization of crafts in
rural areas, obliteration of distinction between town and country,
demonetization of economy, closed economy, the jaymani system
12 f Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
and sub-infeudation. The strengthening of the agrarian economy
and the regrouping and reorganization of social relationships
within the ideological framework of the varna system, all occupa-
tional groups ossifying into castes, are seen as the social aspect
of the change.”
The decline of early historical urban civilization is envisaged
in terms of a collapse of the early historical social order, rending
the fabric of that ‘normative order’, the transition to the early
medieval period being located in the social upheaval, i.e. the
crisis of the Kaliyuga. The crisis and the fall of the early social
order is further associated by yet another study by R.N. Nandi,*®
with a change in the nature of brahmanical dana rites, intro-
duction of new ones by the brahmanas, change from the urban
gift exchange of the Grhya texts to the agro-based dana oriented
jajmani relations of early medieval Smrti and Puranic literature.
The idea of the tirthayatra linked to expiatory and purificatory
rites is said to have helped the brahmanas to build up a new
clientele and new avenues of support. What is significant in this
connection is the attempt to establish that the decay of early
historical towns led to migration of brahmanas from these towns
to rural areas and that as a result of the new dana rites and
tirthayatra concept, these early towns turned into firthas or
pilgrimage centres.
The historical phenomenon of the decline of urban centres
by the third century aD is generally accepted among historians
studying early historical urbanism and the new socio-economic
order of the early medieval period.’ Yet, researches in early medie-
val urbanism have raised several questions as to the validity of
this generalization for the whole subcontinent and the long
period of de-urbanization after the third century aD. Examples
of the continuity of inland trade and of urbanization associated
with it are found in early medieval centres of the ninth century AD
in the Doab and Western Ganges valley in the Garjara Pratihara
period (ninth to eleventh centuries). Typological differences
notwithstanding, these centres, which were not planned town-
ships, appear as central points in local commerce, in which the
conglomeration of hattas (godowns) and residential areas led to
ron: not precluding the effect of long-distance
rade.
Introduction ff 13
In Rajasthan, evidence of the emergence of exchange centres
has been found in different pockets as a continuous process in
an agrarian context.*? They appear as nodes among clusters of
rural settlements, where commercial levies were collected, some
of them also being centres of political power, e.g. Naddula or
Nadol, a Chahamana centre. Although the intensity of com-
mercial exchange was unequally distributed, a complex pattern
of trade involving a wide range of goods, agricultural as well as
high value items, use of coined money along with other means
of exchange and a hierarchy of exchange centres have been
identified. The ascendancy of local merchant lineages, like the
Oesvalas and Srimalas, their interaction with itinerant traders
from distant regions in an expanding network of intra-regional
and inter-regional trade are other significant aspects of this
urbanism.
No definitive studies on early medieval urbanism in the
Deccan and Andhra regions are available. Yet, similar patterns
are indicated by current research on early medieval urbanization
and some aspects of economy in general,® which highlight the
economic aspects of urban growth in comparative studies of
selected sites.*' It may be noted that the tendency in all these
works is to emphasise the importance of trade, both inland and
maritime, as the major factor in urban growth, thus assigning
primacy to economic factors and ignoring others, including the
political. One of the major concerns in the present collection
of essays is to study the mingling of several factors, economic,
political and ideological, in varying degrees of importance in
early medieval urban processes.
Trade, crafts and commercial activities and their institutional
organization seem to dominate studies on urbanization, both
in the early historical and early medieval periods. Hence, in the
attempt to seek overall perspectives, no difference is perceived
in the basic nature of early historical and early medieval ur-
banization.”
Economic criteria are no doubt basic, often dominant and
uniformly significant in urban genesis and particularly useful
in distinguishing spaces allotted for rural and urban functions.
Yet, a predilection for economic criteria, as capable of explaining
urban forms and patterns in different periods, often results in
14 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
a partial understanding of the processes and structures. It has
been pointed out that even where direct correlations are found
between forms of urbanism, on the one hand, and modes and
stages of economic growth, on the other, such relationships
cannot be treated as self- explanatory.“ Cultural and ideological
forces could bring about new institutional foci for economic
activities and could induce processes different from one phase
of urbanism to another, or even play a dominant role in
determining the city’s ultimate character and morphology by
leading to the genesis of its institutions for creating ‘effective
space’, i.e. that organizing and regionalizing principle, which 1s
the essence of urbanism.®
It is in the nature of this organizing principle and its insti-
tutional forms that the early medieval urbanism differed from
that of the early historical period. The distinction lay in the
ideology, z1z. on the one hand Buddhism and its institutions,
in the early historical urban phase facilitated the evolution of
urban forms in the trade and commercial centres, and the
building of communication networks; on the other, the brah-
manical ideology created new institutional means to build up
cultural and religious networks, which facilitated trade and
commerce in the early medieval period.
The differences go beyond institutional forms to the sphere
and pattern of patronage and relations of dominance that
developed in the two periods. Buddhism, patronised by rulers
and merchant communities alike, initiated a process of change
in societal organization by providing institutions like the Sangha
and a more universal ethic, at least in theory, and a social
thought cutting across caste and creating a sense of community,
a community of monks (renouncers) and lay followers, a con-
trast to the brahmanical ideal of varndsramadharma.™ Urban
centres being places where people interact, work and have
transactions with others not of their own caste or community,
the Buddhist ideal of non-caste organization and association
would, no doubt, have enabled institutionalized dealings with
strangers (non-kin and other caste groups) and with foreigners.
_ State patronage to Buddhist institutions was more in the
interests of promoting trade and networks of resource movement
and accumulation and less an act of legitimation oft heir power.
Introduction y 15
The complex of domination in those centres of Buddhism was
distinct from the political centres, particularly those of the
Satavahanas and Iksvakus. Indeed, the Buddhist Sangha was an
alternative source of authority distinct from priestly power and
the coercive authority of the state.’ On the contrary, the early
medieval authority structure was created by the state, in which
a coercive ruling power and priestly authority combined to bring
about a complex of domination, both in the rural and urban
centres, and a continuum of social hierarchy, which was more
fully enacted in the cities.
The monumental forms like the st#pa were not royal projects
but were a result of individual gifts brought together through a
religious identity and a more loosely defined social identity.* The
stupa became the symbol of the Sangha and its authority. Interest-
ingly, the whara or the monastic structure, as well as the stupa
were located in the outskirts of most urban centres and did not
form the nucleus of an expanding settlement. Community
patronage declined from the middle of the first millennium aD
and it was replaced by royal and priestly patronage as well as elite
participation in gift-giving. In fact, the early medieval temple was
invariably a royal project, both for legitimation of political
authority and as an institution of integration, mobilization and
redistribution of resources. The pattern of social dominance is
reflected in the architectural components of the temple complex,
particularly in cities, as centres of politico-cultural regions within
the Tamil macro-region, a conclusion which is inevitable as seen
in the studies of centres like Tafjavar and Kaficipuram.”
Itt
The present collection of essays aims at providing regional
perspectives based on empirical studies of specific urban centres
within a socio-historical and cultural context highlighting the
major incentives and focal points for urban growth. The region
chosen for study is Tamilakam, which in the early historical
period covered a larger geographical’ area than the present Tamil
* From the tip of the peninsula in the south to 13° north latitude would
roughly indicate this region.
16 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Nadu or even the early medieval Tamil macro region, 1.e. it
included present Kerala region as well till about the seventh-
eighth centuries AD. The periods covered by these essays are the
early historical and the early medieval, 1c. third century BC to
third century AD and sixth to thirteenth centuries AD.
In the early historical period, urban forms emerged in restric-
ted zones, i.e. urban enclaves in two cco-zones, viz., the marutam
(plains) and neital (coast/littoral) tn the form of consumption
points and trading ports. Some transit zones like the semrarid
Kongu region, rich in mineral resources, acted not only as route
areas but also as craft production enclaves.” This early urbanism
was not the result of the forces of an inner growth but was of
a secondary generation induced by inter-regional trade, mainly
coastal, between the Ganges plains, Andhra and Tamil regions
and overland between the Deccan and Tamil region. More
significantly, it was induced by maritime commerce between
South India and the Mediterranean west and subsequently with
Southeast Asia. However, unlike in Satavahana Deccan, this
secondary urban development does not seem to be related to
secondary state formation, as Mauryan imperial and cultural
influences were less direct than in the Deccan and Andhra
regions. In other words, political processes were not functionally
related to urban genesis, which was mainly the result of external
stimulus and hence were not at the core of the transformation.
Early Tamil society did not emerge fully out of its tribal basis
to evolve into a full-fledged state-society.
It would seem that ‘urban revolution’ in this period was an
almost ‘mystically sudden impulse’! to change due to external
stimuli, i.e. maritime trade. The withdrawal of the stimuli led
to the decline of this phase of urbanism which coincides with
the disappearance of the early ruling families of the Cola-Céra-
Pandya lineages creating a ‘political vacuum’, i.e. lack of clear
political and economic configurations till the rise of the early
medieval kingdoms of the Pallavas and Pandyas by the end of
the sixth century ap.
Urban decay, which is believed to be a general historical
phenomenon in the subcontinent in the post third century aD,
is less clearly attested to in this region both in archaeological
records and Tamil literary traditions, the latter being more
Introduction J 17
concerned with the decline of the ruling families than with the
decay of urban centres. Nor do they refer to artisans and
merchants falling on bad days or to their migration. On the
contrary, the post-Sangam literary works such as the epics,
Silappadikaram and Manimékalai, point to a continuity of trade
activities in at least the major centres of the early historical
period like Kanci, Vafici and Madurai apart from Kavérip-
pumpattinam, the major port of entry into the region.
In so far as Tamilakam is concerned, the theory of urban
decay and the consequences of deurbanization pose several
problems. First is the nature of the archaeological data and its
interpretation. As pointed out in an earlier section (II) all sites
with similar archaeological data were not urban.” Sites such as
Kunnattur, Nattamédu, Alagarai, Tirukkampuliyur etc., which
have come up with archaeological material similar to others like
Arikamédu, Kaverippumpattinam, Korkai, etc., cannot be cat-
egorised as urban. There was a general change in the pattern of
settlements both with a rural and urban base. No uniformity
or homogeneity in the pattern and nature of settlements is
attested to by the archaeological data. Monumental remains
occur in very few centres, especially those on the coast, while
the inland centres hardly equalled them in such remains.
More important, the social upheaval located in the crisis of
Kaliyuga has no relevance to early historical Tamil society, where
the brahmanical social order of the vamma had taken no roots
and had no validity as the normative basis for social organization.
Nor is there evidence of evil days for brahmanas, artisans and
others or of brahmana migration from towns to rural areas in
the post-Sangam, i.e. post- third century AD period. The Kaltyuga
crisis is adopted in the early medieval land grants (seventh-ninth
centuries AD)” mainly as a formula to emphasize the need to
establish the brahmanical order, to enhance the importance of
monarchy as an institution and the role of the ksatriya or ruling
families in the preservation of the ‘normative’ social order, 1.¢.
varna order as the theoretical basis of societal organization. The
function of the brahmadeya of the early medieval period ts mainly
as an institution integrating pre-existing pastoral and agricultural
settlements into a new agrarian order and as the disseminator
of brahmanical ideology.
18 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Early medieval urbanization was one of primary (inner) urban
growth and not of secondary generation as in the early historical
period. The essays in the present collection are aimed at showing
this process in which new urban centres emerged with the temple
as the nucleus—a rural-urban continuum in institutional and
structural forms. More important, it was a period of re-urbaniza-
tion for some of the early historical urban centres like Kafici-
puram. Kaficipuram’s urban character was mainly due to its
commercial importance in the early period, while in the period
of transition (third to sixth centuries), it continued to hold its
position in an external trade network with Southeast Asia, and
was brought into an inland commercial network with an ex-
panding agricultural hinterland in the re-urbanization of the
early medieval period.”*
It may also be pointed out that in the early historical period,
the religio-political foci for the transformation of the tribal,
kinship based communities into stratified, hierarchically or-
ganized societies were absent, despite the fact that both the
brahmanic and Sramanic religions were prevalent, especially in
the marutam and neital eco-zones, none of them enjoying a
predominant status. Significantly, Buddhism had a larger fol-
lowing in the coastal towns, Jainism in the inland centres
marking trade routes and both these religions in addition to
the brahmanic religions had a significant presence in the larger
urban centres like Kaficipuram, Madurai, Uraiyur and Vafici.
Such religio-political foci are the major factors of the early
medieval period in the emergence of urban forms which created
the physical and functional spaces for urban economic activities,
for social dominance and political authority.
The present state of empirical research on urban history, the
elusive character of urban theory, the limited scope of models
and the variety of contexts to be dealt with prevent these essays
from aiming at a goal too high to reach, viz. an overall
perspective and analytical framework for the two periods of
Indian history dealt with here. What is proposed in this collec-
tion is to examine the sets of relationships that a town/city
establishes with its immediate surroundings or hinterland and
the wider network of settlements of a similar nature and of
different economic functions. Another major concern is with
Introduction J 19
the ideological forces behind the development of such centres
and the role they play-either in perpetuating certain societal
norms and values or introducing changes through ‘new ideas
and new ways of doing things’.” A distinction between economic
development and cultural change needs to be made, without
overstressing the importance of one over the other. Here, the
idea of the town as a locus for change or prime mover in change
also becomes useful.
If urban studies are made for a given cultural region, wherein
historical geography can provide some useful insights, then a
necessary step forward would have been taken in making com-
parative studies possible and towards achieving overall perspec-
tives for urban history in India. These essays, it is hoped, have
taken that step forward.
Referenc es
1. Philip Abrams and E.A. Wrigley, Towns in Soaeties: Essays in
Economic History and Historical Sociology, Cambridge University
Press, 1978, Introduction: Louis Wirth traces the notion of city
as an independent variable to the influence of studies on Western
Industrial Cities. ‘Urbanism As a Way of Life’, American Journal
of Sociology, July 1938, vol. xuv, no. 1, 1-24.
2. M.M. Postan, The Medieval Economy and Socety, University of
California Press, Berkeley, 1975, 212.
3. Rhoads Murphy, ‘Traditionalism and Colonialism: Changing
Urban Roles in Asia’, Journal of Asian Studies, 1969-70, vol. 29,
68.
4. Ravi Arvind Palat, ‘Symbiotic Sisters: Bay of Bengal Ports in the
Indian Ocean World Economy’, in Resat Kasaba (ed.), Cities in
the World System, Contributions in Economics and Economic
History, 1991, no. 126, Greenwood Press.
Abrams and Wrigley, Towns in Societies, Introduction, 3-4.
Ibid.
NOU H arold Carter, An Introduction to Urban Historical Geography,
London, 1983, Foreword, xiv.
8. Abrams, ‘Towns and Economic Growth’, in Towns in Societies, 21.
9. G. Sjoberg, The Pre-Industrial City, Past and Present, Glencoe, Illinois,
1960.
20 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
10. F. Braudel, Capitalism and Material Life: 1400-1800, London, 1973,
373. Pre-industrial cities are not necessarily a homogeneous
phenomenon. See RobertJ .S mith, ‘Town and City in Pre-modern
Japan: Small Families, Small Households and Residential
Instability’, in A. Southal (ed.), Urban Anthropology, New York,
1973, 104.
11. Robert Redfield and Milton Singer, ‘The Cultural Role of Cities’,
Economic Development and Cultural Change, 1954, m1, 53-73.
12. Susan Lewandowsky, ‘Changing Form and Function of the
Ceremonial and Colonial Port City in India: An Historical
Analysis of Madurai and Madras’, in K.N. Chaudhuri and Dewey
(eds), Economy and Society, OUP, 1979, 299-329.
13: Narayani Gupta, “Towers, Tanks and Temples: Some Aspects of
Urbanism in South India: Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries’,
Occasional Paper Series-5, Urban History Association of India,
1983.
14. S.N. Eisenstadt and A. Shachar, Soctety, Culture and Urbanization,
Beverley Hills, 1987, 357-61.
IS: Howard Spodek, ‘Beyond Rorschah Tests: Palimpsests and Nodes.
Conflicts and Consciousnesses in South Asian Urban Theory’,
in Howard Spodek and Doris Meth Srinivasan (eds), Urban Form
and Meaning in South Asia: The Shaping of Cities from Pre-historic to
Pre-colonial Times, National Gallery of Art, Washington D.C.,
255-68.
See Renu Thakur, “Urban Hierarchies, Typologies and Classifica-
tion in Early Medieval India: « 750-1200’, Urban History, April
1994, vol. 21, part 1, 61-76.
See Richard Basham, Urban Anthropology, The Cross Cultural Study
of Complex Societies, Mayfield, Palo Alto, California, 1978, 41.
- Robert McC. Adams, Evolution of Urban Society: Early Mesopotamia
and Pre-Hispanic Mexico, Aldine, Chicago, 1965, 126-7.
Paul Wheatley, The Pivot of the Four Quarters, A Preliminary Enquiry
by Origins and Character of the Ancient Chinese City, Edinburgh,
SILI,
Wheatley, ‘The Concept of Urbanism’, in Peter, J. Ucko, Ruth
Tringham and G.W. Dimbleby (eds), Man, Settlement and Ur-
banism, London University, London, Duckworth, 1972, 600-37.
; Abrams, ‘Towns and Economic Growth’, 25.
» Spid., 31-2.
- Horace Miner defines the city as a centre of dominance. See ‘The
City and Modernization, An Introduction’, in H. Miner (ed.),
The City in Modern Africa, New York, 1967, 3, 5-10.
Introduction J 21
24. M. Weber, Economy and Society, New York, 1250ff.
v4.7 H. Pirenne, Medieval Cities: Their Origins and Revival of Trade, Tr.
by Frank D. Halsey, Doubleday, Garden City, New York, 1956;
M.M. Postan, The Medieval Economy, 212.
John Merrington, ‘Town and Country in the Transition to
Capitalism’, in R.H. Hilton (ed.), The Transition from Feudalism to
Capitalism, London, 1978, 170-95.
. Abrams, ‘Towns and Economic Growth’, Introduction, 1 and 11;
Palat, ‘Symbiotic Sisters’, 19.
. See Chapter 1 in this volume.
. Basham, Urban Anthropology, 43.
. Wheatley, The Pivot of the Four Quarters, 8.
. Romila Thapar, “Towards the Definition of an Empire: The
Mauryan State’ in The Mauryas Re-Visited, Calcutta, 1987.
. Sudershan Seneviratne, “Kalinga and Andhra: The Process of
Secondary State Formation in Early India’, in H.M. Claessen and
P. Skalnik (eds), The Study of the State, Mouton, The Hague, 1981,
317-38.
33. Morton Fried, ‘On the Evolution of Social Stratification and the
State’, in Stanley Diamond (ed.), Culture in History: Essays in
Honour of Paul Rodin, Columbia University Press, New York,
1960, 713, 729-30.
34. Wheatley, “Urban Genesis in Mainland Southeast Asia’, in Smith
and Watson (eds), Early South East Asia: Essays in Archaeology,
History and Geography, New York, 1973, 288-303.
35. B.F. Hoselitz, ‘Generative and Parasitic Cities’, Economic Develop-
ment and Cultural Change, 1954-5, m, 278-94.
36. John Friedmann, ‘Cities in Social Transformation’, Comparative
Studies in Society and Htstory, 4, 86-103.
37. Wheatley, The Pivot of the Four Quarters.
38. R.A.L.H. Gunawardana, ‘Anuradhapura: Ritual, Power and Resis-
tance in a Pre-Colonial South Asian City’, in Daniel Miller,
Michael Rowlands and Christopher Tilly (eds), Domination and
Resistance, London, 1989, 155-78.
k > Wheatley, The Pivot of the Four Quarters, 319. The primary role of
religious belief in the origin of Islamic cities is compared to the
case of nationalism put forward by Reissman in relation to
modern urbanization. See Reissman, 7he Urban Process, Cities in
Industrial Society, New York, 1964, 188.
40. Adams, Evolution of Urban Society, 50.
41. City morphology in Asian countries is believed to have been
influenced by its ceremonial character, the centre being marked
22 4 Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
by a monumental building, either religious or political. The
seventeenth-century Europeans’ description of Asian cities also
looks at them as ceremonial and administrative phenomena. (See
Murphy, ‘Traditionalism and Colonialism’, 69.)
. Carter, Urban Historical Geography, Foreword, viii.
. Wheatley, The Pivot of the Four Quarters, 319.
. §.N. Eisenstadt, ‘Social Change, Differentiation and Evolution’,
American Sociological Review, 1964, vol. 29, 377 (375-86).
. Mircea Eliade, Le Mythe de l'eternal Retour, Paris, 1949.
. Wheatley, The Pivot of the Four Quarters, 258ff, 308ff, 398ff.
. B.D. Chattopadhyaya, ‘Urban Centres in Early Medieval India:
An Overview’, in S. Bhattacharya and R. Thapar (eds), Situating
Indian History, New Delhi, 1986, 11ff.
. See Seneviratne, “Kalinga and Andhra’, for the Impact of Mauryan
Polity over the Deccan.
. See Chapter 2 in this volume, and Rajan Gurukkal, ‘Forms of
Production and Forces of Change in Ancient Tamil Society’,
Studies in History, July-Dec. 1989, vol. 5, no. 2, 159-76.
Aloka Parasher, ‘Social Structure and Economy of Settlements in
the Central Deccan (200 Bc-ap 200)’, in Indu Banga (ed.), The
City in Indian History: Urban Demography, Society and Politics,
Manohar, (UHAI), 1991, 10-46.
ae. Parasher, ‘Social Structure’, idem ‘Nature of Society and Civiliza-
tion in Early Deccan’, Indian Economic and Social History Review,
29, 4 (1992), 437-77. Also H.P. Ray, Monastery and Guild: Commerce
Under the Satavahanas, OUP, Delhi, 1986.
R.S. Sharma, Urban Decay in India (c. 300-c. av 1000), Munshiram
Manoharlal, New Delhi, 1987.
Ibid.
Ibid., chapter 6.
. Ibid., chapter 9.
R.N. Nandi, ‘Client, Ritual and Conflict in Early Brahmanical
Order’, Indian Historical Review, July-Jan. 1979-80, vol. 6, nos 1
and 2, 64-118.
Vijay Kumar Thakur, Urbanisation in Ancient India, Abhinav, New
Delhi, 1981, chapter vi; B.D. Chattopadhyaya, ‘Trade and Urban
Centres in Early Medieval North India’, /ndian Historical Review,
Sept. 1974, vol. 1, no. 2, 203-19; also ‘Urban Centres in Early
Medieval India’.
58. Chattopadhyaya, ‘Trade and Urban Centres’.
59, Chattopadhyaya, ‘Markets and Merchants in Early Medieval
Rajasthan’, Social Science Probings, Dec. 1985, vol. 2, no. 4, 413-40.
Introduction J 23
. M. Abraham, Two Medieval Merchant Guilds of South India,
Manohar, New Delhi, 1988, chapters 1 and m-n.
. Chattopadhyaya, ‘Urban Centres’.
. A. Ghosh would, however, assign primacy to both political and
economic factors in early historical urbanism, See The City in
Early Historical India, Simla, 1973.
. Chattopadhyaya, ‘Urban Centres’.
. Abrams, ‘Towns and Economic Growth’, 20.
. Wheatley, The Prvot of the Four Quarters, 398.
Romila Thapar, Cultural Transaction and Early India: Tradition and
Patronage, OUP, Delhi, 1987, 28ff also idem ‘Patronage and
Community’, in Barbara Stoler-Miller (ed.), The Powers of Art,
OUP, Delhi, 1992, 19-34.
67. Thapar, 1987.
68. The donors were merchants, crafts guilds, families of gabapatis
(householders), monks and nuns: but among them there was
only a ‘smattering of families from royalty or high political or
administrative office’ who are associated with monuments like
the st#pa—See Thapar, Cultural Transaction and ‘Patronage and
Community’.
69. See Chapters 7 and 8 in this volume.
70. See Chapter 2 in this volume for a detailed discussion of early
historical urbanism in Tamilakam.
71. These terms were introduced by Robert J. Braidwood and Gordon
R. Willev (eds), Courses Towards Urban Life: Archaeological Considera-
tion of Some Cultural Alternates, Viking Foundation, Anthropology,
no. 32, 1962.
72. Sharma, Urban Decay in India c sv 300-1000, New Delhi, 1987,
The list of sites in south India.
73. Champakalakshmi, ‘Ideology and the State in Medieval South
India’, Mamidipundi Venkatarangiah Memorial Lecture, Proceed-
ings of the Andhra Pradesh History Congress, 13th session, Sti Sailam,
1989,
74. See Chapter 7 in this volume.
TH B.F. Hoselitz, ‘The Role of Cities in the Economic Growth of
Underdeveloped Countries’, Journal of Political Economy, xi, 1953,
199.
1
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview
: Jr ban history is an area of comparatively recent interest
among historians, particularly historians of India. The
central concern in historical research in India has more often
been with agrarian systems, peasant history, and the general
pattern of socio-economic change, rather than urbanization per
se. Growth of urban centres is of marginal interest even to the
studies on trade patterns, merchant and craft organizations
and the role of the state in the promotion of such activities.
For the early historical and early medieval periods in India,
even the few available works on urban centres suffer from a
woeful lack of clear orientation and a meaningful framework.
There is a tendency to follow the notion that ‘a town is a
town, wherever it is’, and that, being a visual phenomenon,
the town/city should be made an object of study in its own
right. As a result, these works are nothing more than compila-
tions of lists of towns under various categories such as market,
trade and commercial centres, political and administrative
centres, and religious centres.’ Any attempt to explain the
causal factors in the emergence of towns is incidental to this
approach. Historians have often succumbed, it would seem, to
the tendency of studying the ‘form’ at the expense of the
‘substance’ of the urban characteristics of a place.
In the more recent attempts? to understand the range of issues
involved in the urbanization of early medieval India, the major
concern has understandably been with the processes of urban
growth. While their emphasis has been on the need for overall
perspectives and analytical framework as against typologies, they
also highlight the problems in such exercises due to the inade-
quacy of empirical research.
The concern with processes rather than typologies also brings
us to the central issue in urban history, namely, whether the
visual presence of towns is a justification for treating what is
‘essentially a physical object’ as a ‘social object’ to be ‘turned
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview / 25
into a focus of analysis in its own right’, i.e. a reified concept
of the city as a decisive agency or independent variable in the
process of social change,’ or whether urban history should be
pursued as ‘part of the analysis of those broad socio-economic
changes with which history is concerned’,’ i.e. those socio-
economic changes which generate urban forms. It has been
reiterated that the ‘proper concern should not be with cities as
such but with complex societies, in which cities and their
hinterlands are interwoven into tight political and economic
webs’.’ In studying the evolution of urban forms, there is the
additional hazard of taking a single factor as universal and
attributing absolute primacy to it, or overstressing one aspect
as innovative or catalytic at the expense of others.
The hazards of searching for a general framework not-
withstanding, research available on the ancient and early his-
torical periods in India has shown that there were two major
periods of urbanization, to which a third may now be added
for the early medieval period.® It is also generally accepted that
the first urbanization, i.e. the Indus Valley urbanization of the
proto-historic period, left no legacy beyond the middle of the
second millennium Bc.’ The second or the early historical phase
represents a long period of urban growth stretching from the
sixth century BC to the third century aD. With its epicentre in
the Ganges valley, it spread over the whole of North India by
the third century Bc, and over Central India, Deccan and the
Andhra region between the second century Bc and third century
AD. It must be stressed, however, that it is the latter part of this
long chronological span that witnessed the most clearly visible
manifestations of this urbanism.
The end of the second urban phase is a time-marker for the
early historical period and provides a starting point for the
protagonists of the theory of ‘Indian feudalism’, 1.c. a new
socio-economic formation, based on a land-grant system.’
I
In South India, the second (or, strictly speaking, the earliest)
urbanization is represented by its end phases, evidence of its
26 ys Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
spread appearing at slightly different chronological points in
the Deccan, the Andhra region and the Tamil country. By the
beginning of the Christian era, it had become an all-India
phenomenon. The beginnings of this urbanization are placed
in the sixth century BC with its epicentre in the Ganges valley,
where expansion of trade in ripples’® around the early janapadas
assumed significant proportions by the third century Bc, with
a network all over the north, Central India and the Deccan and
with arterial links with Central Asia and West Asia. The spread
of this network into the Deccan and Andhra region was un-
doubtedly brought about by overland trade links from the third
century BC and the expansion of the Mauryan state. However,
it would be erroneous to assume that without the impact of
maritime trade, the phenomenal increase in the trade activities
of the Deccan and Andhra regions from about the second
century BC to the third century aD could have taken place.
In the extreme south, 1.e. Tamil country (including modern
Kerala), the effects of this urbanization were only indirectly felt.
Visible clues to the contrastive urban experience of this region
are the striking absence of trade networks, lack of organizational
coherence (i.e. guilds) and the nature of Tamil polity. No less
evident is the absence of a dominant religious ideology. The
key to the understanding of these differences lay in the distinc-
tive socio-economic milieu of the eco-system called the timai,"!
within which the emergence of towns and the pace of urbaniza-
tion have to be viewed.
It is not a matter of coincidence that the earliest ruling
families or ‘crowned kings’ (vendar), as they are described in
early Sangam Tamil literature, emerged in the marutam tinat,
representing the fertile agricultural tracts of the major river
valleys. The earliest towns also arose in these tracts as well as
in the neital or coastal/littoral. Such centres were consciously
developed by the ruling families. These two tinais were domin-
ated by the Céras (Periyar valley), Colas (Kaveri valley) and the
Pandyas (Vaigai and Tamraparni valleys). The marutam was
marked by an inland town of political and commercial impor-
tance and the neital by a coastal town of commercial importance,
e.g. Uraiyur and Kavérippimpattinam (Puhar) of the Colas,
Madurai and Korkai of the Pandyas and Vafici (Karuvar) and
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview i 27
Muciri of the Céras. These towns in effect represent the develop-
ment of dual centres of power.!?
Located in the rice-producing marutam tracts, the early
chiefdoms or potential monarchies with their janapada-like
polities’ evolved out of earlier tribal organizations. The agricul-
tural potential of the major river valleys attracted settlers from
very early times and numerous settlements had emerged by the
beginning of the Christian era, the Kaveri delta showing a fair
concentration of such settlements."* It is not clear whether and,
if so, to what extent, the ruling families helped in this process,
although a late tradition attributes an irrigation work on the
Kaveri to one of the Colas. It is possible that the impact of
trade, particularly maritime trade, led to intensification of
inter-timai exchange, which in turn could have provided an
incentive for extracting the ‘surplus’ of the agricultural tracts
and channelizing it towards trade. However, no direct and
organized control appears to have been acquired by any of the
‘crowned kings’ over the agricultural tracts, no regular tax
structure having been evolved. The institutional forces, which
defined the ‘excess’ requirements, provided for its appropriation
and defined its utilization’? are not known to have existed
under the Colas, Céras and Pandyas. The hegemony of the
vendar was rather loosely held. Performance of Vedic sacrifice
and patronage to brahmanas were not an intrinsic part of the
legitimation process in this period,'® although evidence of both
is available in the Sangam anthologies.'’ Even at such sacrifices
wealth would have got distributed rather than accumulated as
a resource. The continuance of inter-tribal warfare'’* and war
loot was perforce the only recourse to supplementing resources,
most of which were redistributed in the form of patronage to
poets and bards, and some channelized into trade.
The kurinai tinai (hilly areas) was particularly rich in resources
such as aromatic wood, which were exported outside the Tamil
region. A symbiotic relationship developed between these and
the marutam and neittal tracts. For, in return for paddy and salt,
the people of the marutam and neital acquired the rich resources
of the hilly tracts.!? Inter-tribal warfare was another means by
which the ruling families of marutam obtained such resources.
In this context, the wars among the vendar”® or ‘crowned kings’
28 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
themselves become significant, as they represent attempts by
each of the three rulers to gain control over the resources of
the others. The Cola attempts to gain access to the pearl fisheries
of the Pandya coast and the rich pepper areas of the Cera Nadu,
would be significant as showing their interests in establishing
an exchange system.
The mullai tinai on the fringes of settled agricultural tracts
represented a transitory ecological zone and could gradually
have merged with the latter with the expansion of agriculture
and irrigation facilities.2! Some of the mullai tracts were also
locations for important routes such as the Kongu region—the
Coimbatore and Salem districts—and thus became areas of
contention among the vendar. While inter-tinai exchange would
have introduced a symbiotic relationship at one level, there still
was a natural element of competition and hostility due to the
contrasts in the productivity of the different timais. Predatory
raids” were hence common and references to the razing of the
enemies’ fields and despoiling of water tanks” show that the
kunna and mullai chiefs were no passive observers of the
increasing influence of the véndar, when they fell short of their
basic resources.
In the process of establishing inter-timai exchange emerged
several settlements, probably as foci of inter-timai contacts, which
from the criterion of modern urban centres, cannot be classified
as urban. Yet, in contemporary perception, these settlements
were distinct from their hinterlands both in size and antiquity.
Such settlements may often be recognized from the terms used
to denote them, viz., mudur (old settlement) and péerar (large
settlement), usually found at the junction of inter-timai ex-
change, bordering on marutam land or, occasionally, as the
centres of the chiefs of the kurriici and mullai.*
The more commercially active and organized towns were the
pattinams located on the coast. This accounts for the fewer and
sparser urban settlements in the interior and their presence only
in the marutam and neital tracts, i.e. the inland capital and
coastal port. Even these were no more than trade enclaves,
particularly the pattinam on the coast like Puhar or Kavérip-
pumpattinam. The instance of Puhar is striking, for it was an
emporium, an entrepot, acting as a collection centre, perhaps
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview Pi 29
comparable to a gateway city (Puhar means river entrance) to
its hinterland, the Colanadu.”* However, evidence of an extensive
network connecting this port through subsidiary towns or nodal
points does not exist, and the situation was no different in
relation to ports like Nirpeyarru (for Kacci or later Kaficipuram),
Arikamédu (Virai, a vélir port), Korkai (of the Pandyan coast)
and Muciri (of the Céra coast)” Local exchange was hardly
linked to the type of wholesale or bulk activities of such enclaves,
for the local exchange system was subsistence-oriented. The
deployment of goods from the ports and into them, was in the
hands of individual traders and merchant families, guild ac-
tivities being least attested to in the Tamil region. The emphasis
was on luxury and exotic items of import, some of which were
prestige goods, or what are called primitive valuables. They could
have been of ideo-technic (or socio-technic) value to the ruling
families,“ and hence it is not clear how significant this trade
was as a resource potential to the rulers, who were only little
more than tribal chiefs. Yet, their interest in this trade is attested
to in several ways as, for example, in levying duties on goods
(ulgu porulY’ coming to the port, and in using imported luxuries
as an alternative means of supplementing irregular tribute, due
to the lack of coercive power to directly tax the people of the
rich agricultural tracts, i.e. the farmers. Social distance and a
symbolic contrast between the ruler and the ruled may well have
been the major advantage.
The inland towns could at best be described as consumption
points, although there is some evidence of Uraiyur, Kacci and
Madurai as textile manufacturing centres, forthcoming mainly
from literary evidence and, to a limited extent, from archaeologi-
cal finds.*® In most cases, archaeological finds have not proved
to be particularly illuminating, except for Puhar, where again
harbour facilities are attested to,’' but manufacturing activities
are hardly indicated. Even the ‘monumental’ architecture” that
has been unearthed in Puhar is chronologically later than the
period of intensive commerce. One area of potential archaeologi-
cal significance is the region of Coimbatore, where a concentra-
tion of commercial and artisanal activity is beginning to emerge
from the excavations at Kodumanal, the Kodumanam of San-
gam works situated on the banks of the Noyyal river.’ The
30 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
provenance and distribution of punch-marked and Roman coins
in the Coimbatore region lends additional support to its im-
portance. Details of the archaeological evidence regarding other
centres, inland and coastal, the artefactual remains of Roman
objects, and the Roman factory site at Arikameédu, need not
detain us here, for these have been highlighted time and again
in studies on the Sangam period and on the early Indian trade
contracts with the Roman west.”
The major concern in discussing the impact of maritime trade
on the Tamil society is to assess the nature of urban development
and transformation of society through such impact. The Tamil
society, especially of the Cola region, i.e. Kaveri valley, had
reached the level of a farming society from a former position
of tribal organization. Survivals of their tribal origins are still
echoed in the early anthologies.** Similar to other traditional
‘peasant societies’, it also retained a high degree of subsistence
production which did not find its way to the market place,
located at this time only in a few urban centres. The market
principle did not govern its exchange and the hinterland people
were not dependent for daily requirements on long-distance
commerce, which in itself was oriented towards trade in luxury
goods. The luxury goods that entered the interiors, circulated
through networks of kinship, patronage and clientele, through
redistribution and prestation.** The foci of long-distance trade
were the market centres on the coast, the urban clientele being
the rulers, members of the elite—the camror and uyarndor—who
gained social prestige from which flowed other privileges, pre-
dominantly political. Not surprisingly, ruling families like the
Colas, consciously encouraged external trade connections, de-
veloped ports and planted their agents or officers to supervise
and control the flow of goods.*”
_ The kurinci and mullai tracts, as seen earlier, were not directly
involved in this commerce, but were brought into the commer-
cial circuit through the marutam rulers. They were largely tracts
of relative isolation, and were characterized by simpler forms
of socio-political organization. Processes leading to the develop-
ment of socio-economic diversification were limited in these
tracts, which could sustain only ‘segmentary tribes’ in small
dispersed settlements.** Again, as primitive valuables or prestige
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview if 31
goods, the luxury and exotic items could have induced the
chieftains of these tracts to encourage the flow of goods, as it
gave them the opportunity of enhancing their socio-political
status.°?
It has been argued on the basis of ethnographic data, that
trade alone can rarely bring about the evolution of social
stratification from a non-stratified society, since such systems
have an in-built mechanism to prevent the equilibrium being
destabilised.® In the marutam tinai a certain degree of diversity
seems to have accompanied the agricultural settlements through
the evolution of crafts related to agricultural activities, and
smiths, carpenters, jewellers, goldsmiths, weavers and metal
workers are constantly referred to in literature. Evidence of a
broad dual division of society is provided by the reference to
the canror or uyardor and the ilicinar. The position of domin-
ance was occupied by the chiefs or kings and the landed local
elite (velir, ktlavan or kilan, talaivan, entat), collectively referred
to as uyarndor and canror (the superior ones), while the lower
category, generally termed as ilicinar, were engaged in various
‘inferior’ activities or subsistence production."' It is only in the
medieval commentaries on Sangam works that references to the
superior veéldlas (land owning group) and inferior vélalas (cul-
tivators) occur together with the vélir chiefs as the dominant
land owning groups controlling fairly large areas of agricultural
land,” indicating that stratification based on land distribution
and control was believed to have existed even in this early period.
The velir are described in the Sangam works as lesser chiefs,
pastoral-cum-agricultural, but next in importance only to the
vendar as a dominant socio-political group and as patrons of
the Tamil poets.
The differentiation became more marked in the marutam and
neital regions, where the capitals and ports were located, and
where an increase in trade ventures introduced a further element
of diversification, such as individual traders, vantkaccattu or
groups of merchants, king’s officers or customs agents, and
warehouse guards in the market and port towns,“ leading to a
more complex society. The relatively undifferentiated ‘tribal’
society was disintegrating and differentiation had set in.
The chief economic activities in the neital tracts, apart from
32 " Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
trade, were fishing and manufacturing and selling of salt, in
which the Valainar and paratavar were involved.® The paratavar
gradually diversified their interests to become pearl fishers and
traders, and their increasing participation in coastal trade deal-
ing in expensive items like pearls, gems and horses 1s indicated
in the descriptions of their commerce and life style.*° Salt
manufacture and trade also became a more specialized activity
with a group called umanar. However, the evidénce, on the
whole, suggests that craft specialization was, with the exception
of a few spheres,” at a rudimentary level. Nor is there any
evidence on craft guilds or artisan guilds. Merchant guilds are
also not known to have been a regular part of the commercial
organization, although there is a single epigraphic reference to
a nigama from Tiruvellarai* and literary reference to a merchant
of Kavérippumpattinam as a Masattuvan (Sarthavaha).” The
producer was quite often also the dealer in the commodities
manufactured,” and manufacturing activities were generally on
a low level.
Money as an exchange medium was evidently used only in
larger transactions and long-distance trade, and perhaps only by
itinerant merchants. Numismatics for this period in the Tamil
region is one of the most problematic of sources, despite the
fact that a large number of hoards of punch-marked and Roman
coins, apart from stray pieces from stratified archaeological
levels, are available. With the possible exception of a single
hoard of punch-marked coins, assignable to the Pandyas*! on
the basis of the fish sign on the coins, and another attributed
to a lesser chief in the North Arcot region, no regular “dynastic
issues’ were known, till the recent discovery, in the nineties, of
Cera and Pandya coins with legends, and some with portraits.
The varna-based organization of society is also not clearly
attested to, despite the fact that the priestly brahmanas are often
referred to as a distinct social group enjoying a high status. The
Tolkappiyam reference to the four-fold division of society occurs
in the Porul atikaram® of the work, suggesting a later date for
the use of this framework of social stratification for the Tamils.
The idea of ritual pollution was, however, prevalent, and groups
associated with impure activities are said to have lived separ-
ately.°* This may well have been a survival of the tribal system
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview / 33
even in the marutam region where the varna differentiation first
emerged.
The spread of Buddhism and Jainism, coinciding with the
increase in trade and commercial activity, would also seem to
have introduced an element of further diversification, especially
in the urban centres. Jainism was, more often, predominantly
represented in the inland towns, and Buddhism in the coastal
towns, especially Puhar. Their patrons came mainly from the
commercial community, i.e. merchants and craftsmen,* apart
from ruling families. The heterogeneity of the urban population
of which the yavanas® (people of West Asian and Mediterranean
origin) were also a part, shows that people of different ethnic
origins and belonging to various religions aggregated in towns,
and brahmanical and folk cults were also well represented in
most centres. No single dominant religion is attested to in any
of them.
There is little by way of archaeological evidence to establish
the social complexity. Some indication of it is seen in the
Megalithic burials, many of which are coeval with the period
of the Sangam classics.*” Burials containing a variety of war
weapons, apart from other agricultural implements, may be
associated with the high status warrior and chiefly groups. The
five kinds of burial practices mentioned in the Manimeékalai,*
one of the two post-Sangam epics, would also suggest a possible
differentiation in the rank and status of the groups involved,
which, however, can be assessed only on the basis of a study of
all the burial types, their distribution and contents.
Thus, the ultimate manifestation of the impact of trade is
seen mainly in the marutam and nettal eco-zones, with a greater
diversity of occupations, i.e. ‘a new and more complex division
of labour’.5? However, the pace of social differentiation and
urban development was not only slower, but hardly reached the
level of a system in which tight networks of institutional forms
and relationships® could emerge similar to that of the Deccan
and Andhra region.
Even within the Tamil country, the nature of urban growth
in the Pandya and Céra countries differed significantly from
that of the Cola dominated regions. A major thesis*’ on the
effect of the coastal sea traffic on the Pandya coastal region and
34 F Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
of northern Sri Lanka would place the Pandyas as pioneers in
the promotion of coastal and overseas trade, and attributes to
them the introduction of the Brahmi script in the Tamil
country, as the earliest Tamil-Brahmi inscriptions occur in the
Pandya region. Seen together with the possible association of
the Pandyas with the earliest dynastic coinage and their
patronage of the Tamil literary academy called the Sangam, it
is not a matter of surprise that it was Madurai, the Pandya capt-
tal, which became the Tamil city par excellence. In the Pandyan
context, it is suggested, the impact of the western sea trade in
the ‘urbanization/civilization’ of this part of the peninsula and
the Sri Lankan coast was minimal, whereas the initial stimulus
is attributed to coastal sea traffic from Gujarat in the west to
engal in the east in the pre-Mauryan and Mauryan times.
Overland traffic is assigned lesser importance through the
Mauryan times.” Equally significant is the fact that the most
important transpeninsular route connecting Karnataka and
Kerala with Tamil Nadu, passing through the Kongu region, is
marked by Brahmi inscriptions chronologically later than those
of the Madurai region, once the arid Pudukkottai area is crossed
from the south.’ The commercial importance of the Kongu
region has been noted earlier, and the route, which passed
through it, was popular down to the medieval times among
itinerant merchants.“
At this stage, it may be useful to delineate the major differen-
ces, and to recapitulate the contrastive urban experiences, of the
Deccan and the Tamil country. As we have seen, they are
ultimately traceable to ecological and cultural factors as well as
political organization. The river system of the Deccan plateau
shows certain restraining factors, making the region conducive
only to the growth of relatively smaller areas of agriculture. On
the contrary, it was less restrictive and more suitable for the
growth of communication and transport networks, with the
passes in the Western Ghats linking the coast to the interior
and the relatively drier zones helping uninterrupted travel and
easier movement. The expansion of these routes subsequently
to include the Andhra region in a tight commercial network
took place when a larger agricultural base in the Krishna Valley
was acquired by the Satavahanas in the latter part of their period.
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview 5S
The Satavahanas adopted brahmanical ideology for legitimat-
ing their rule, with their. commitment to the varndsrama ideal
probably originating from their earlier priestly affiliations.
The advantage of conceding the dominance of Buddhist ideol-
ogy over merchants, and others involved in commerce and
production for trade, both overland and overseas, was also
understood by them. In the Deccan the symbiotic relationship
which existed between the political structure, the commercial
groups and the Buddhist order have been clearly recognised.®’
The power structure which thus evolved, reflects in many ways
Mauryan ideological influences or the continuation of Mauryan
institutions, in what may be seen as ‘secondary state forma-
tion’,“ and a monetary system controlled to a large extent by
the ruling dynasty. Royal patronage of the expanding trade
and a dominant Buddhist ideology, which helped evolve in-
stitutions such as the monastery and guild to support it, mark
the contrastive processes in urban growth in the Deccan and
Tamil country. The only common element was overseas trade,
evidence of which is overwhelming.
Reference has been made earlier to the importance of the
tinai in determining the socio-economic development of the
Tamil country. Tribute and not tax, warfare for loot and plunder
as well as hegemony,” use of money in long-distance trade by
itinerant traders, and in larger transactions, local exchange
remaining out of the circuit of inter-regional commerce, and,
more importantly, the absence of institutional forces like the
Buddhist monastery and the traders’ guild, marked the urban
growth of the Tamil region with a remarkably lesser degree of
intensity. Added to this were the absence of a clear varna based
social stratification, and the emergence of urban enclaves which
left kinship and communal organization relatively untouched
over vast agricultural plains and other ecological zones.
Under the véndar, the chiefdoms, which appeared to mark a
transitional stage in the evolution of the state, never passed the
transitional to the state level.” The reasons for their decline
may be sought not only in the sudden arrest of urban growth
due to the withdrawal of the western trade, but also in the lack
of coercive power and institutional control over the agricultural
plains themselves. They seem to have been overtaken by a crisis
36 f Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
caused by decline in trade and, at the same time, by ambitious
chiefs of other eco-zones, whose descent into the plains was not
a mere predatory raid but, more, a lasting occupation of rice-
yielding tracts, over which the control of the véndar was becom-
ing increasingly tenuous, as their socio-political prestige was at
a very low ebb. If urbanization consequent upon long-distance
trade could induce the formation of a state society, this did not
happen in the Tamil region to the same degree as in other parts
of India during the early historical phase. Hence, long-distance
trade may be seen both as a cause and an effect of state
formation, depending upon factors other than trade itself.”' In
fact, territorial expansion and political unification have been
regarded as less indirect consequences of urban genesis than as
functionally inter-related processes ‘at the very core of the
transformation’.”
The cultural ethos of Tamil society given to the ideals of love
and war (akam and puram, both implying heroism), generosity
and patronage, i.e. a kinship-oriented value system, and the
predominant folk component in worship and religion, i.e. an
‘anthropocentric’ worship, would also indicate that social norms
had not yet shed their tribal moorings. What was needed was
a formalized religious system and its universalization through
acculturation, a system which could combine in it many of the
folk and popular elements with the Puranic Sanskritic tradition
that swept the sub-continent by the end of the sixth century AD.
The so-called Sangam period has often been stretched from
300 Bc to AD 300 and even beyond. Hence, the use of the Sangam
works as a single corpus of sources for the whole period is
hazardous, especially in view of the different internal chrono-
logies suggested for these collections, and the fact that they were
collected and systematized much later in the eighth to ninth
centuries AD. It would, therefore, be more valid to treat them
as representing different layers of poetry, and at least two levels
of social organization, 1.¢, the tribal stage persisting in the mullai
and kunci regions, and an incipient stage of urbanism develop-
ing in the marutam and neital. Such a change was rather suddenly
arrested, both due to the decline of trade and lack of an
institutional coherence and resource base to fall back upon in
a Crisis.
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview dl 37
Il
The early historical phase of urbanism has thus been shown to
be the result of external trade, an ‘urban revolution’? in a
restricted locus within which the process was concentrated,”
leading to the emergence of urban or, more correctly, trade
enclaves. The discontinuity caused by the decline of trade”
around the third century AD, is represented as a period of crisis
in Tamil Society of the post-Sangam era, in the later literary
and epigraphic records of the seventh to ninth centuries AD.
Was it a crisis of urban ‘devolution’? Or, was it a breakdown
of earlier tribal forms, followed by a transition towards the
genesis of a new socio-economic formation in the later period?
This period of socio-political subversion is also attributed by
later brahmanical records to the onslaught of evil kings (kali
arasar or Kalabhras) and the dominance of ‘heterodoxy’. If the
later socio-religious developments are any indication, this
period, for which no contemporary records exist, may be de-
scribed as one of flux and instability due to the decline of the
three traditional véndar, and a possible clash of interests among
new aspirants to social and political authority,” including the
lesser chiefs, and competition among brahmanical, Buddhist
and Jain religions for patronage.
The early medieval urbanization may be located within a
broad time span of six centuries (seventh to thirteenth centuries),
in which one may see the operation of the ‘ramp process’ applied
by Adams for the study of Mesopotamia and Meso-America,
two areas of nuclear urbanism, as a metaphor of heuristic value,
for it enables one to come to grips with urban revolution as
‘an intelligible sequence of change rather than simply accepting
it as an almost mystically sudden impulse’.” To understand this
phase of urbanization, one of the first essential steps would be
to study the major shift in agrarian organization and the
remarkable degree of agrarian expansion which characterized
the centuries of Pallava-Pandya rule and which continued well
into the Cola period, i.e. ninth to eleventh centuries AD.”
The first intelligible records pointing to the genesis of a new
socio-economic formation are of the seventh to ninth centuries.
38 js Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Signs of the change were visible much earlier in the marutam
region with its tendency to extend agricultural activities. The
earliest attempt to introduce large-scale agriculture in non-
marutam areas or drier localities is evidenced by the Pulankuricci
record of early brahmadeyas (datable to the fifth century AD).”
New integrating forces like the brahmadeya and the temple under
the aegis of the Pallava-Pandya ruling families, led to the exten-
sion of agricultural activities and a more intensive organization
of production geared to support large populations in the brahma-
deyas and temple-centres. Clusters of such settlements emerged
as the foci of urban growth by the end of the ninth century
AD, showing that an initial search for urban cores among such
clusters would result in a better understanding of the processes
in this region. Examples of such clusters may be recognised in
the Kaveri delta at Kudamukku-Palaiyarai, the residential seat
of the Colas from the ninth century aD, and in the Tamraparant-
Ghatana valley in the two brahmadeyas, Rajarajacaturvédimanga-
lam and Ceravanmahadevi-caturvéedimangalam, from the close
of the tenth century ap.”
The Pallava-Pandya period would represent a stage of incipient
urbanism, when the royal centres or seats of the ruling families
show a similar growth around temples, i.e. Kaficipuram and
Madurai. These cities had a long historical past as the centres
of the Tiratyar and Pandyas of the Sangam classics. The nature
of these cities and their corresponding ports has been discussed
earlier. What is important, however, is to perceive the changing
character of these cities in the early medieval period as a result
of the new institutional forces of integration, which brought
them into a much closer relationship with their hinterlands in
the northern and southern parts of the Tamil country, as well
as with their ports located on the coast, i.e. Mamallapuram and
Korkai respectively. In the process emerged a number of brah
madeyas in the hinterland with temples as their nuclei, appended
to which were the pre-existing agricultural and pastoral settle-
ments with a certain degree of subsistence production.
The brahmadeya and the temple were evolved as institutional!
forces by the brahmana-ksatriya allies in power and, hence, were
products of brahmanical ideology expressed through Vedic and
Puranic religion, and initially sponsored by the ruling families
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview / 39
claiming ksatriya (or the brahma-ksatriya) status and divine
descent. That they developed into institutions of substantial
political and social power with economic privileges has been
demonstrated in most studies relating to them or based on
them.*’ However, what has not been made clear in these works
is the nature of economic advantage, i.e. as a source of revenue,
to the kings who sought to establish their sovereignty through
them. This may be explained, to a large extent, as due to the
problems of interpretation of the sources, both epigraphic and
numismatic. One of the ways in which a recent study on the
nature of medieval Indian polity has approached this problem
is to underscore the need to look at resource mobilization as
logically inseparable from the process of redistribution of
resources to integrative elements within the state structure.”
The failure to understand this interconnection has led to the
theory of the ‘politics of plunder’ as a major mechanism of
resource acquisition and redistribution.”
Two important spheres in which the brahmadeya and temple
may be seen as harbingers of advanced farming methods were
the technology of irrigation and the seasonal regulation of the
cultivation process. For the introduction of both these steps for
improving cultivation, there seems to be reliable evidence from
the Pallava-Pandya records, when they are considered in their
geographical and ecological setting. With each one of the brah
madeya and temple settlements an irrigation system was invariab-
ly established, either in the form of tanks, canals or wells in
the Pallava-Pandya regions.% Many of them were initiated by
the rulers but managed by the local bodies. Elaborate arrange-
ments for their upkeep were made by the sabhds or assemblies
of the brahmadeyas, including maintenance, repair, attention to
silting and control of water supply through cesses, and specifying
committees (variyams) for their supervision and administration.
Effective management was indeed the key to the difference in
the farming societies of the earlier (Sangam) and later (seventh
to ninth centuries) periods.®
The brahmanas were organizers and managers of production
in the brahmadeyas and the velalas or land-owning peasants in
the non-brahmadeya settlements, where the focus of activities was
the brahmanical temple. However, it may be surmised that it
4o / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
was the former, who, on the basis of their specialised knowledge
of astronomy,® would have introduced an element of predict-
ability in yields, on the basis of seasonal sowing and cropping
patterns, as well as effective management of water resources. It
may be added here that in the records of this period, demarca-
tion of boundaries, establishment of ‘ownership’ or enjoyment
rights, nature and category of land, and the number of crops
to be raised become important details.
Brahmadeyas in most cases may have meant the giving away
of rights, economic and administrative, to the donees, but
instances are not wanting to show that they were not completely
exempt from revenue payments to the king.*’ The real ad-
vantages lay in integrating older settlements and non-brahmadeya
villages (#7) into the new agrarian system, and also in bringing
virgin land under cultivation, both waste land and forest (mullai
region). There are also examples of several pre-existing settle-
ments being clubbed together into a new brahmadeya or in-
tegrated into it. The tax exemptions given to the brahmadeyas
do not obviously apply to such villages thus brought into the
system, unless otherwise specified. That regular dues reached
the royal bhandaras 1s also clear from the ‘structured’ circulation
of resources through the madu or kurram and the brahmadeya
or temple, to the king.® The circulation of resources was
effected through the temple as the disseminator of the bhakti
ideal, 1.e. through non-economic or extra economic coercion.
However, at the local level, the chief beneficiaries of the
redistribution process were the locally powerful elite, temples
and brahmanas, apart from temple functionaries and tenants.
The co-ordination of production and distribution processes
were in the hands of the sabha and ur, which has been seen
as a result of a brabmana and dominant peasantry alliance and
the crystallization of a peasant society.®’ The land grant system
has also been interpreted as a feudal one, in so far as it provides
evidence of the emergence of intermediaries, both religious and
secular, between king and cultivator, and suggests exploitative
relations between a land controlling class and labouring class
of peasants.”
Our concern with either the brahmana-peasant alliance and
the segmentary state theory that it has evoked, or the feudal
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview ff 41
polity model for medieval India, is clearly marginal and has
particular reference only to the Cola situation, where urban
growth and the direct royal involvement in promoting trade
and exchange networks by using the magaram as one of the
agents of a state synthesis, go against any theory of segmentation
of power, as will eventually be shown through a discussion of
the character of the Tamil city under the Célas. Nor is the
evidence for a feudal polity clear enough to be applied for the
South Indian state until the rise of Vijayanagar. In one of the
recent attempts to characterize the early medieval polity as
feudal, the rigour of analysis and empirical controls needed for
understanding the complex nature of inscriptional evidence on
agrarian relations are absent.” It is also not possible at this stage
to see whether the crisis attributed to ranking as the political
basis of organization of both local and supra-local structures
was a feature of the Cola state, and whether the shifting nature
of territorial and political holdings in other parts of medieval
India” was present in it. For the Cola state was undoubtedly
one of the most stable structures known to pre-colonial India,
and we believe that it was a powerful ideology which supported
the Cola efforts to mobilize a huge resource base.
Before we spell out the ideological underpinnings of the Cola
state, which had a distinct influence on the nature of the Cola
city, one other major aspect of this agrarian expansion and
integration needs to be understood more clearly than has been
done hitherto. This was the evolution of agrarian units like the
kottam, a pastoral-cum-agricultural region, the nadu and kurram,”
which in the main were agricultural regions. By extension, this
nomenclature came to be used even for areas of dispersed
agricultural settlements, or even those with other resources like
salt and pearls (umbala nadu and muttarru kurram), where agricul-
ture was a major occupation in addition to salt manufacture and
pearl-diving. All the three units pre-date the Pallava-Pandya period
and yet, they emerged as viable units of socio-economic and
political importance only in relation to the new ruling elite of
the seventh to ninth centuries ap.”*
This intensive process of agrarian integration is reflected in
the numerous brahmadeyas and temple centres of the seventh
to ninth centuries visibly emerging in the form of religious
42 fe Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
architecture—rock-cut caves, monolithic temples and structural
edifices—of the Pallava and Pandya regions.” Land relations
came to be organized around the brahmadeya and temple with
three categories of landowners—the brahmana, the velala and
the temple—emerging as the local elite. Societal organization
was based on the vara framework, but expressed through two
broad categories—the brahmana and the non-brahmana, within
which most of the occupational groups were placed in a ritual
hierarchy around the temple, the concept of purity-pollution
operating at all levels, thus keeping the untouchables out of
the temple precincts. The North Indian evidence shows that
untouchables were mainly those who came from ‘culturally
backward’ tribal groups and were condemned to take up menial
work and sometimes ‘impure’ work like carrying dead bodies
and sweeping the streets etc.*° With the growing economic
disparity and the large-scale dissemination of brahmanical ideas
in the early medieval period, the tribal groups such as the
paraiya became the untouchables in South India.
The absence of a vaisya category” in this region has been
attributed to ‘the growth of the brahmanical agrahdra in an
agricultural setting, where trade was not a very important factor
in the economy of these regions at this stage and the number
of communities dependent on trade must have been fairly small
to have been practically ignored in the records of this period’.
This would appear to be true of the seventh to ninth centuries,
but with the gradual expansion in the exchange nexus among
the agricultural settlements and the continuation of long-dis-
tance trade in coastal areas, the trading community emerged as
a distinct class by the eighth to ninth centuries ap. A regional
version of the theoretical varna system developed, with impor-
tant modifications depending upon the specificities of the
politico-economic system that emerged. In the case of the
ksatriya varna, the indigenous ruling families acquired the
ksatriya status and politico-economic dominance. The participa-
tion of the ruling families in these processes was as important
as that of the brahmanas, who composed the genealogies for
them, and was mainly intended to establish socio-political dom-
inance with economic privileges, through religious networks,
‘the strongest thread in the fabric of the medieval agrarian
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview / 43
system’.” The Pallavas, who were alien to the Tamil country,
and who had imbibed brahmanical ideas in their original home,
i.e. the Andhra region, claimed to be brahma-ksatriyas tracing
their descent to Brahma, but emphasizing their ksatriya-hood
for political dominance.'® The Pandyas, on the other hand,
were a traditional Tami! power and clung to their older associa-
tions with Siva and Agastya, but adopted &satriya status in their
records.'” All this is, however, relevant only in explaining the
imposition of the varna framework on non-Indo-Aryan societies.
The crucial question, however, relates to the diversification of
occupation, with the expanding agrarian system, and how it
created the need for an ideology to accommodate the newly
emerging occupational groups. That such diversification and
social differentiation accompanied the growth of brahmadeya
and temple centres'™ is established by the reference to various
categories of temple functionaries, craftsmen in the service of
agriculture and agricultural workers, i.e. division of labour. The
principle of heredity inherent in the varna framework would
seem to have been stretched so as to bring all these social groups
within its vortex under the jati label. Thus, we find the varna-
jati division coalescing in many cases, with the economic or
professional groups. Society had become much more complex,
and one more dimension was added to it by the third institution,
i.e. magaram, which emerged by the eighth century ap. Thus,
social differentiation would seem to be the crux of the problem
of urbanization, and it is to those processes which created such
differentiation that urban history should address itself.
The relevance of the above survey of societal organization,
although repetitive in some of its essential details, lies in the
fact that it provides the basis on which answers to several
questions which arise in relation to urbanization in pre-in-
dustrial societies may be sought. These questions, to which
attention has been drawn by historians in general and economic
historians in particular, relate to two main issues, namely,
agricultural growth and the availability of a surplus as a neces-
sary precondition to urban growth, and the degree of importance
commerce and overseas trade have in the development of com-
modity production, exchange and the growth of towns.
The urban forms generated by the end of the Pallava-Pandya
44 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
period, through centuries of agrarian development, found ex-
pression in two categories of centres, the royal centre (capital)
and the market or commercial centre. The two royal centres of
Kaficipuram and Madurai will be taken up for discussion in a
later section dealing with royal centres. Our immediate concern
here is with the market or commercial centres, 1.e. nagaram, and
as the royal centres were also commercial centres, they were
inevitably a part of the expansion of the trade network in the
subsequent centuries. In fact, the commerce of this period was
organized around these two cities, and the few magarams that
are known from the Pallava-Pandya records were located only
in certain key areas linking the capitals with the rich Kaveri
basin and with the coast. The nodal points of such commercial
links were at the confluence of rivers and in the delta areas, as
seen in the case of Virificipuram (Seruvalaimangalam), Tiru-
kkoyilir (Kovalur), Tiruvadigai (Adirajamangalyapuram), and
Tirukkalukkunram of the Pallava region and Karavandapuram
(Ukkirankottai) and Manavirappattinam (Tiruchenditr) of the
Pandya region. The ports of Mamallapuram, a mdnagaram, and
Korkai served the Pallava and Pandya hinterlands respectively.
The commercial importance of the Kaveri region upto the ninth
century AD was clearly linked to the Pallava- Pandya regions and
hence the nagarams of this region are relatively fewer, only two
having been attested to by epigraphic evidence so far, i.e.
Kumaramarttandapuram (Tirunagésvaram) and Cirrambar ori-
ented to the northern and southern regions respectively. The
distribution of the magaram in the seventh to ninth centuries
would hence suggest that there existed no direct link between
such market centres and their kottam or ndadu in which they
were situated, reflective of a town-hinterland relationship, i.e. in
the manner in which the nagaram came to be linked to the
nadu from the tenth century Ap.'® In other words, the exchange
nexus was more oriented towards the commercial needs of the
royal centres and less as a regular market for the immediate
nadu or kottam.
The pattern clearly shows that regular marketing facilities
became a pressing need from the early Cola period for every
nadu, and \ed to a spurt in commercial activity which henceforth
brought the Tamil region into a larger network ofi nter-regional
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview / 45
and overseas trade and, above all, to the evolution of a full time
trading community, looking after the local exchange nexus, as
well as participating in wider commerce. The nagarattdr, i.e.
members of the magaram, thus came to be a generic term for
all Tamil merchants, a name by which the Cettiyar community
of the Nattukk6ttai region, i.e. Pudukkottai and Ramanatha-
puram districts, are known to this day.
The nagaram members sought validation within the existing
institutional means, i.e. the temple, by participating in gift-giving
and temple management functions. Their status was hardly
different from that of the agricultural groups, for they were
agriculturists now taking to trade. Yet, the magaram represents
the first ‘secular’ element in society, in so far as the membership
of the magaram, unlike that of the sabha and ur, was determined
by a common profession."
The nagaram organization assumed the character of a local
body maintaining local markets, supervising the flow of goods,
providing a regular link between mddus and itinerant traders,
thus breaking the insularity of the nadx (if it continued to exist
under the Célas) and its ties of kinship. Two institutions which
thus brought the nddus closer together in a system of unified
political organization and economic exchange were the brah
madeya and nagaram, both of which were used as interdependent
agents of political synthesis under the Colas.
The emergence of market centres for all the agrarian regions,
and a commercial network linking the four major mandalams or
sub-regions known from Cola records, coincided with the rise
of the Colas, and the proliferation of the magaram kept pace
with the expansion of Cola power. The distribution pattern of
nagaram in the early, middle and late Cola phases shows a
remarkable increase in the middle phase, not only within the
Tamil country but also beyond its ‘cultural frontiers, 1.e. in the
southern Karnataka and the Andhra region, over which Cola
power extended in the eleventh century ap. The areas giving
access to the powerful neighbouring kingdom in Karnataka, i.e.
Kongu region and Gangavadi, show a conspicuous increase in
nagaram centres. In consolidating their conquests the Colas not
merely renamed the conquered areas, as for example, Ganga-
vadi into Mudikonda-Colamandalam, but also founded new
46 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
nagaram centres like Mudikondacolapuram (Coimbatore district-
Kongu region) and Nigarilicolapuram (Malur-patna in Mysore).
This was a practice followed by the Colas after every territorial
conquest, as seen in case of Rajéndracolapuram in the Tirunelveli
district after the conquest of the Pandya region, the eleventh
century being a period of the constant movement of Cola troops
into the neighbouring kingdoms of the south and of Karnataka
and Andhra. The nagaram thus established crucial inter-regional
links and, as a result, acquired enhanced political influence. This
is further corroborated by the reference to Tamils holding ranks
of officers, administrators, trustees and managers of temples,
apart from merchants, artisans and craftsmen residing in various
centres in Karnataka, in addition to settlements of Tigulas
(Tamils) as far north as Belgaum district in the eleventh to
thirteenth centuries AD.’™
A marginal increase in nagaram under the late Colas, and the
rise of new ones in the Pandya region after Cola decline and
re-emergence of Pandya power in the thirteenth century AD,
demonstrate the importance of royal or political support to the
commercial organizations and their activities. Medieval kingship
was certainly not a mere ritual or dharmic sovereignty, nor did
it preside over a segmentary power structure, when viewed in
the context of political and commercial expansion. Resource
mobilization, at least under the Colas, whose power structure
and territorial authority were more stable than any other medi-
eval South Indian dynasty, was carried out under the aegis of
the ruling family and its government.
A second important development in the middle Cola period
took place within the magaram organization in the form of a
further diversification in trading activities due to specialization
in marketing and trade. There now appeared specialists like the
Saliya nagaram for trading in textiles, Sattum Parisatta nagaram
also specializing in textile trade, and Sankarappadi nagaram as
suppliers of oil and ghee, whose activities were, however, con-
fined to specific localities of commercial importance. The
Paraga nagaram was another group representing seafaring mer-
chants, who are seen only in areas marking the trans-peninsular
routes. In contrast, the Vaniya nagaram refers to a larger or-
ganization ofo il-mongers which originated in the Tamil country
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview / 47
around the tenth century and became a supra-local trading
organization, similar to the Te/iki of Andhra region, which arose
in the eleventh century aD. The Vantya nagaram spread out by
entering into the inter-regional commercial network, acquiring
a viable economic status by the twelfth and thirteenth centuries,
so as to be included in important decision making processes
involving the merchant community. Horse trading was another
specialized occupation of merchants from Malaimandalam
(Kerala) throughout the medieval period. Arab trade in horses
was conducted mainly through the western ports, and the
Kudtrai cettis of Kerala procured and transported them to the
Cola country and often acquired residential quarters within the
Cola heartland and other areas, like the commercially viable
Pudukkottai region, linking the Cola land with Tondi on the
eastern coast. The movement of traders individually and collec-
tively over long distances within the Tamil country and between
the Tamil country and Kerala, Karnataka and Andhra region,
represents the continuation of a long tradition of trading in
South India, but the frequency with which references to such
traders occur in the Cola records would show that this had
become a regular phenomenon due to the demands of external
trade, of which spices, aromatics, incense, horses, gems and
textiles were the most important items.
The impetus to organized commerce came not only from the
revival of peninsular trade but, more importantly, as a part of
the revival and expansion of South Asian trade from the tenth
century AD, involving the South Asian and Southeast Asian
kingdoms and China. Together with the nagaram network, the
emergence of merchant organizations to look after the long-dis-
tance trade proved to be a major factor of urbanization in the
eleventh to thirteenth centuries, furthering the process which
began in the tenth century ap.’
Organized commerce is one of the more important but less
understood areas of economic activity in medieval South India,
in which corporate trading communities like the Ayydvole and
Nandadesi participated. These communities are often described as
guilds, although indisputable evidence of their organization into
a well-defined, structured and cohesive body is hard to find. The
use of the term ‘guild’ is hence a matter of convenience, rather
48 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
than for establishing parallels with the medieval European guilds,
the Hang of China in Sung and Yuan times, or the Karimi of
Egypt. In their own inscriptional records, they are described as
a samaya, i.e. a convention or organization born out of an
agreement or contract, and their code of conduct was the
bananju dharma, a conventional set of rules and regulations.’®”
The organizational aspects of these merchant bodies have
been inadequately understood due to the inconsistent descrip-
tions and terminology used to denote them. The occurrence of
a number of non-merchant groups like craftsmen, agricultural
groups and militant groups jointly in the guild records, espe-
cially in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, have added an
element of confusion and complexity to their activities. The
presence of local bodies like the ~agarams and lesser organiza-
tions like the Manigramam and Anjuvannam, may also be said
to increase the complexity, as it is not easy to determine their
individual and coliective roles in commercial activities, due to
the overlapping spheres of interests.
The obscurity and confusion caused by such overlapping
interests implied in their records would disappear, once the
context, regional and economic, in which they occur is eluci-
dated. An attempt in this direction has helped, to a great
extent, in distinguishing the nature and functioning of these
bodies. The inadequacy of all the earlier studies on these guilds
is attributable to their failure to recognize the exact relationship
of the supralocal to the local bodies and their role in the
respective areas. One of the ways in which this may be achieved
is to discuss them in the sequential order in which they
emerged, and their increasing socio-economic functions and
Institutional importance vis-a-vis other socio-political groups
and the state.
As the whole corpus of information on South Indian trade
at this time centres round the body, variously called the
Ayyavole Five Hundred, the Aiiurruvar (Five Hundred), the
Nanadesi and Valanjiyar, it would be appropriate to start from
the Five Hundred and proceed to enquire into the nature of
their organization and relationship with other bodies.
The Five Hundred, which originated in Aihole in the Bijapur
district of Karnataka in the eighth century aD, was the largest
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview / 49
organization of itinerant merchants of a supra-regional character.
They are easily distinguishable from the Manigramam of the
Tamil country, a merchant organization operating within specific
regions, as the designations ‘Uraiyir Manigramam’ and ‘Kodum-
balur Manigramam’ and the distribution of their inscriptional
references would show. The Manigramam established long-
distance trade links early in their history, but subsequently
improved them through interaction with the Five Hundred or
the moving trade carried on by the Five Hundred in their regions.
The Manigramam was apparently a descendent of the group of
traders from Vanika-grama in Kavérippumpattinam, who, after
the decline of external trade in the early period, moved into the
interior to places like Uraiyur and Kodumbalur, where they
re-emerged as Manigramam, an organized group of traders, by
the ninth century ap. The Manigramam, like the nagaram, retained
its unified composition and character, as it was also a part of
the local agricultural communities which branched out into the
trading profession by controlling the local exchange nexus
throughout the period. It is an interesting contrast to note that
in early medieval Rajasthan, there emerged a number of merchant
families who were either resurgent local merchant lineages or
new ones, which established wide intra-regional and inter-regional
networks. Their names were derived from the places of their
origin, such as the Uesavala-jnattya, the latter day Oswals.'™
Another body of merchants known as the Anvjuvannam rep-
resented an organization of foreign merchants, who began their
commercial activities on the west coast (Kerala) in the eighth
and ninth centuries and spread out to the other coastal areas
of South India by the eleventh century AD, interacting both with
the local merchants and the Five Hundred, a symbiotic relation-
ship being fostered by trade interests. The earliest known record
of the Axjuvannam refers to a group of Jewish traders who
acquired settlements on the west coast from the Venad (South
Travancore) rulers. The term Avjuvannam, wrongly interpreted
as a group of five different communities or castes, may well be
derived from Anjuman, perhaps first used by early Arab Muslim
traders of the west coast, a name surviving down to the four-
teenth and fifteenth centuries on the Kanara coast among
Muslim traders as Hanjumana.
50 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
The founding of the Ayyavole (The Five Hundred) in the eighth
century AD, may be attributed to a decision of the 500 maha-
janas of the mahagrahara of Aihole, to provide an institutional
base for the commerce of this region. The organization later
expanded its activities to other parts of South India. It would
be erroneous, therefore, to assume as Kenneth Hall has done,
that this organization originated as groups of expeditionary
merchants, who serviced less wealthy or isolated communities of
the hinterland and found it profitable to band together for
mutual protection, and subsequently became powerful merchant
organizations. On the contrary, many of the militant groups
which accompanied the Five Hundred as protectors of merchan-
dise, may themselves have been absorbed as part of the organiza-
tion with a stake in the share of the profit. Its origin in Karnataka
may also be seen as a survival of the early historical tradition of
merchant guilds, which dominated the commerce of the Deccan,
a surmise which ts further strengthened by the reference to Athole
as Aryapura and Ahicchatra, thus tracing their origin to Ahic-
chatra in the Ganges valley, which was a major trading centre
in the closing centuries of the first millennium Bc and beginning
of the Christian era. However, the organization did not remain
a single unified body, nor was Aihole its permanent headquarters.
The number, Five Hundred, also became conventional, for the
name was derived from the parent organization and remained
so for the rest of its history, despite the fact that it became a
much larger one, drawing its members from various regions and
communities. It is in this context that the term Nanadesi, Ubhaya
Nanadest (svadesi and paradesi merchants) have been used almost
inter-changeably in their records. The most comprehensive term
used for them in Tamil inscriptions is Néanddestya Tisai
Ayirattu Ainnurruvar, meaning literally ‘The Five Hundred of
different countries from thousand directions’. The Valafjiyar
(Banayigas = traders) and Vira Valanjtyar, also denote the same
organization, but the emphasis in these terms is on their militant
character. The Vélaikkara group associated with the Valavijiyar,
especially in Sri Lanka, forms another militant component in
this organization. The heterogeneous composition of this or-
ganization 1s attested to clearly in the guild inscriptions, which
refer to the different castes of the members, as well as regional
028942
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview / $1
and religious associations. Thus, it was a group of people of
‘disparate origins associating together for a common purpose’,
le. trade.
With the growth of regional kingdoms, the need to protect
regional interests probably led to a bifurcation of guild opera-
tions as seen in Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. Yet, the com-
monality of interests in which it was rooted, generally helped
to maintain the larger unity of the guild. The impressive
prasastis of the guild inscriptions show that it was growing into
a powerful organization. Thus arose in South Karnataka, several
towns called the southern Ayyavole, in the eleventh and twelfth
centuries, especially after the Cola intrusions into these areas.
Into the Andhra region, the organization moved evidently in
the wake of Cola conquests, and after the unification of Vengi
with the Cola kingdom under Kulottunga I (1070-1120). From
its first appearance in the Pudukkottai region in the close of
the ninth century, the Five Hundred fanned out into other parts
of the Tamil country, covering the Cola and Pandya heartlands
and areas connecting the two, as well as those routes connecting
the Tamil region with Karnataka, moving in wherever the Colas
stepped in as conquerors, i.e. Kongu and Ganga regions, Andhra
and Sri Lanka. They controlled the movement of trade in these
areas from important centres of operation like Mudikondan,
Talakkadu, Visakhapattinam and Polonnaruva, respectively. It
was in the link area of Pudukkottai and Ramanathapuram that
the greatest concentration of guild inscriptions occurs between
the tenth and fourteenth centuries. Here, their interaction with
the nagaram and Manigramam organizations was considerably
promoted by the Irukkuveél chiefs of Kodumbalur, the Cola
subordinates of the tenth and eleventh centuries AD.
The close identity of interests between this organization and
the Colas is particularly seen in the royal policy of encourage-
ment to overseas trade through trade missions, maritime expedi-
tions and abolition of tolls, opening up new avenues of trade
through conscious royal effort, which itinerant trade never failed
to make use of. In this context, the presence in Nagappattinam
of Sri Vijaya agents making gifts to the local temples, and the
erection of the Buddhist wihara by a Sri Vijaya ruler for the
Théravada Buddhists, may be seen as a major example of inter-
sew
AS Ji
$2 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
regional commercial ventures being legitimized by religious
grants by the respective ruling families through their political
and commercial agents. By far the most significant step in this
direction was the institution of royal charters setting up pro-
tected mercantile towns called er:virappattanas from the eleventh
century onwards, on trade routes as well as in areas of settled
agriculture. A comparative study of the bananju-pattanas of
Karnataka and Andhra regions with er1virappattanas shows that
the nature of these towns was different from the bananju-
pattanas, in which the administration of the town was carried
on by a pattanasvami, ‘iord of the town’, with the help of
merchant bodies and other local non-commercial groups.
Enivirappattanas were more in the nature of protected towns for
stocking merchandise, and could well have been distribution
points protected collectively by the merchant body. This mer-
chant organization also had temporary or permanent residential
quarters in several places falling within the trade network. A
significant ‘contrast is, however, seen in the royal centres or
managarams like Tanjavur, Kaficipuram and Palaiyarai, where
the itinerant merchant body is conspicuously absent, and where
the local nagaram organizations wielded enormous influence
over the exchange nexus. Similarly, the merchant bodies are not
seen in Cola ports like Nagappattinam, which were not only
developed by the rulers but also directly controlled by Cola
officers and agents. On the contrary, they were active in ports
like Visakhapattinam and Tondi and also Mayilappur (part of
Madras city), which were not ‘royal’ ports. In fact, itinerant
merchants are seen to be frequenting the coastal route and ports
more consistently during the period of Cola decline and after.
The emergence of an umber ofc oastal towns, perhaps as halting
stations, both on a coastal land route as well as coastal shipping,
was a result of this movement.
In the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, there was a pheno-
menal increase in guild activities, with a clear tendency on the
part of the Five Hundred to expand its sphere of influence and
to show less reliance on royal support and patronage, although
some of the guild inscriptions were still dated in the reign
periods of the late Cola and Pandya rulers. We have rather
impressive evidence that in most centres of distribution and
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview x 53
emporia like Piranmalai, Tirumalai and Tondi, the Five Hun-
dred acted jointly with other organizations like the Cittirameéli
Pertya Nadu or Padinen Visaya, in the levy of maganmai (volun-
tary contribution) and pattanappagudi (tolls or shares of the
town) on merchandise. It should be noted, however, that in the
elaborate prasastis of these inscriptions, the pride of place is
given to the Citt:ramel: (meaning the beautiful plough) followed
by the Five Hundred. The institutionalization of these two
organizations through their joint donations to various temples,
and the presence of other bodies like the Manigramam,
Samanta Pandasalis (stockists) and nagaram on such occasions,
are a conspicuous feature of the thirteenth and fourteenth
centuries, marking the decline of the Cola power and the relative
weakness of the re-emerging Pandyas. However, it would appear
that the merchant body had on no occasion the authority to
levy and grant such tolls, except in conjunction with the
Cittirameli and Pandinen Visaya, which were organizations of
agriculturists controlling production and movement of agricul-
tural goods. Presumably, even in the assignment of brokerage
(taragu) or monopoly (valanytyattil-taniccettu) to individuals or
groups of traders on certain items, the Five Hundred exercised
its authority only jointly with the local nadu, nagaram and the
larger Cittiraméli organizations. This is so even in Karnataka
and Andhra regions, where the okkalu and kampulu are constant-
ly present on such occasions, when cesses or tolls were levied
or trading rights were assigned. Yet it is undeniable that this
organization had become powerful and some of its members
were elevated to the status of samaya cakravarti (the king/emperor
of the trading organization). This, and the increasing influence
of individual members who assumed the title of cakravarti, as
seen in Muttam (Pérur in Coimbatore district) and in Piranmalai
(Ramanathapuram District), would indicate an impending
change caused by the accumulation of wealth and power in the
hands of individual merchants, subsequently leading to the
emergence of merchant entrepreneurs.
The Cittirameli Periya Nadu was an organization of agricul-
turists!” appearing quite early in Cola history, in the latter half
of the eleventh century AD, in Tamaraippakkam (North Arcot
district) known as the Rajéndrac6la Cittiraméli Perukkalar.'"° The
54 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
commercial links that they established with the Five Hundred
by the twelfth century aD have been referred to earlier. Their
association would indicate the growing consumption of food
grains and pulses etc. in urban areas, enhancing the importance
of the agricultural classes, which alone could mobilize grain and
other such products for supply to the itinerant traders at the
centres of distribution. Like the Five Hundred, the Crttirameli
also moved into the South Karnataka and Andhra regions by
the twelfth century aD following the Cola conquests. They are
referred to as Meéli Sastravaru in Karnataka and Medikuru in
Andhra.'!! The attempt to compare the kampulu of Andhra and
okkalu of Karnataka with the Czttirameli, does not appear to
have any validity, for the kampulu and okkalu were local or-
ganizations of cultivators, whereas the Crtt:rameli was of supra-
local character.
The Five Hundred and Cittirameli were not caste guilds, for
they were composed of representatives of all the four castes.'!?
Thus we see in both these guilds, an association which was based
On occupation, cutting across caste and religious affiliations.
The early inscriptions of the Five Hundred in the Pudukkottai
region provide clear evidence of the domination of this organiza-
tion by the Jains,'' as in Karnataka, while later records indicate
that it came to include members from all castes and religions,
although the guild deity was called ‘Aiyapolil Paramesvari’. The
Cittirameli prasasti'* is a rather illuminating record, as it refers
to the members as bhamiputras (sons of the earth goddess or
sons of the soil) whose prosperity is attributed to cow’s milk
(living by cow’s milk) and whose profession, the best in the
world, was looking after (feeding) the people of the country. It
would appear that here we have the first indication of the
pastoral-cum-agricultural origins of the organization which took
to trading in agricultural commodities.
As seen earlier, these organizations, originating at different
points of time and in different cultural regions, acted only in
their independent capacity, enacting roles of patronage due to
their economic importance. The Cittirameli however, had a
greater stake in local relations of dominance, as it acted also in
the capacity of dispenser of justice, settling disputes over land
rights and cases of criminal offence.'' The right of fixing cesses
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview / 55
and tolls was, however, exercised by them only jointly with the
Five Hundred, and only towards the end of the Cola period.
Among the other organizations which were also involved in
such decision-making processes were the Samanta Pandasalis and
Anjuvannam, who were significantly confined to the ports, and
may have participated only in assigning tolls on imports and
exports, with which they were directly concerned. Their common
eulogy in the guild inscriptions is the first known expression
of the ascendancy of trading groups in a predominantly agrarian
context. The changing pattern of land ownership in the twelfth
and thirteenth centuries also provides an index of the influence
wielded by various merchant groups and the weavers, aspiring
for a higher social status through acquisition of rights in land
and participation in gift giving and temple building activities.
There 1s one other sphere in which the merchant organization
assumed a dominant role, i.e. in relation to craft groups. This
is much more directly recorded in the guild inscriptions of
Karnataka and Andhra'’* than in Tamil Nadu. The closer inter-
action between the two interdependent sections of the commer-
cial world in these two regions may be traced back to the early
historical phase of urbanism. In the early medieval period they
were increasingly brought together when the manufacture of
goods and production for market came under merchant control
through collective investments. A similar development is per-
haps indicated in the Tamil region even as early as the eleventh
century AD, when, in a slightly different context, the dependence
of the craftsmen on the merchant organization is underlined
in the role of the merchants providing an asylum to the
craftsmen in Erode!”” in the Kongu region which, from the early
historical period, had been an area of craft production. In such
areas the merchants also acted as protectors and managers of
temples, as for example in Mudikondan.
The presence of craft groups with the Five Hundred could
also have provided a certain legitimacy to the Ayyavole’s trade
in various articles. This is particularly important in the case
of weavers, with whom they appear to have established a close
link, for the textile trade was handled practically throughout
South India and overseas by the Five Hundred. Sometimes
Cilai cettis and Saliya nagarattar (weaver-cum-traders?) themselves
56 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
took to trading in textiles, especially as this was one of the
most important items of trade, having an increasing demand
in an ever widening market.
The guild inscriptions refer to a large number of countries
traversed by the merchants, including regions outside South
India. Their presence in Siam, Sumatra and Burma is attested
to by the inscriptions in Takua Pa, Loboe Tiwa and other places.
The guild inscriptions also refer to the area of their operation
as covering 18 pattinas (emporia), 32 valarpurams (growing
markets), and 64 kadigattavalam (periodic fairs). While the num-
bers may be treated as conventional, references are available to
a number of towns falling in these three categories, although
their identification is rendered extremely difficult due to changes
in place names or the possibility that many of them declined
and, hence, are not recorded in present day reports.'®
All the economic development outlined above brought about
an important innovation in societal organization, which helped
to accommodate the craft groups and artisans, as well as lower
categories of agricultural workers within the vertical division of
the Right and Left Hand castes (Valangai and Idangai). This was
a root paradigm!” for social division of all the non-brahmana
and non-vélala occupational groups and other tribal elements
brought in as agricultural workers and menial service men. The
improvement in the economic status of some of these castes,
especially the weavers, produced rivalry for social mobility and
enhanced ritual status. This is expressed in their attempts to be
upgraded within this paradigm from the left hand (lower) to the
right hand (higher) status groups. It is against this background
that frequent occasions of conferring special privileges on the
artisan communities (the anuloma rathakaras and kammalas)'*°
by the merchant organizations, temple authorities and local
chiefs have to be viewed.
The major factors in the urbanization of the eleventh to
thirteenth centuries, described as ‘temple urbanization’,'?' were
thus provided by organized commerce through the magaram, the
Five Hundred, the Cittirameli and other merchant bodies, crafts
organizations, initially of a local nature (and later of a supra-
local nature from the fourteenth century AD), and a tripartite
social stratification (brahmana, vélala and the Right and Left
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview / $7
hand castes). The context in which these features are highly
visible was provided by~multiple-temple centres, single large
temple centres, some of which were also pilgrimage centres, and
finally, the royal centres. It may also be noted that many of
these socio-economic groups were accommodated in the tiru-
madawilagam'* of the temple centres in acknowledgement of
their economic importance. This is especially so in the case of
weavers (-cum-traders) who were economically more powerful
than the others.
Assessing the impact of money on the commercial organiza-
tion and the nature of urbanism in this period is one of the
most vexing problems confronting numismatic studies. Avail-
able numismatic data is perhaps the least capable of providing
clues to the degree and effect of monetization, despite the fact
that a fair number of Cola coins in gold and copper and a few
in silver are known and inscriptional references to coins are
fairly numerous. In the centuries before the rise of the Colas,
the evidence of money as a medium of exchange is hardly
available. The Pandya region seems to have used Arab money
along with a dynastic issue, of which very few specimens have
survived. Money was used sporadically and as one medium of
exchange based on equivalence with paddy.'”
Under the Colas, the currency was ‘not based on any uniform
groups of coins with fixed ratios between different denomina-
tions and metals’.'** The problems in the study of Cola and
Pandya coins have been succinctly stated in several studies on
South Indian coins. Paddy seems to have been the overall basis
of an exchange system, in which coins were used at various
levels with purely local forms of equivalence. Presumably, the
nagaram and itinerant trade brought money into more frequent
use, but despite the references to money gifts to temples, to
cesses being paid in cash, and land prices determined in terms
of money in the late Cola period, no useful analysis of the
monetary system can be made at the present state of numismatic
studies. On the whole, monetization in the pre-Vijayanagar
period was on a low key, and hence its impact on urbanization
is difficult to assess.
The processes outlined above fall into two distinct phases.
The end of the Pallava-Pandya period, i.e. mid-ninth century AD,
58 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
would represent one level of ‘systemic integration’, and the end
of the Cola period another, the transmutation of these levels
involving changes in the structure and patterning of society.'°
The brabmadeya and the temple in the first phase, with their
sabha and ar and the temple in the second phase, with the
nagaram in addition to the sabha and ur, are the chief instru-
ments which helped in the restructuring of society. The nagaram
network and the intersection points of the magaram and itinerant
trade conducted the intra-regional and inter-regional commerce,
resulting in the emergence of several urban centres of different
degrees of importance, with temples as their nuclei. They also
brought together the royal/political centres and the ports that
were consciously developed by royal policy into a tight economic
and political web.
Ill
The above discussion of the processes of urbanization in early
medieval South India has led us to a rather inconclusive state,
namely that no single autonomous, causative factor can be
identified in the nexus of social, economic and political trans-
formations which resulted in the emergence of urban forms.'”®
It has also led us to a final question, namely, what was the one
curiously persistent factor which seems to permeate all activities,
all institutional change and afford a ‘consensual focus for social
life’, rural or urban, that which commands a sort of priority?
The answer would seem to be that it was the act of validation
through an ideology in order to achieve institutional per-
manence and socio-political dominance. Such an ideology, for
early medieval South India, was provided by the concept of
bhakti, or devotion, and the instrument of authority through
which it was expressed was the temple. One may see this ideology
and the power structure it sustained as the determinants in the
ultimate character of the city and in the ‘specific complexes of
domination’, which the cities ‘restlessly express’.!””
Our study of a major urban complex of the Cola period,
viz, Kudamukku-Palaiyarai, has shown that even where trade
and commercial activities were major factors, the presence of
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview / 59
religious institutions was a necessary concomitant of the urban
process.'** Writing on the economy of Kaficipuram in the same
period, Kenneth R. Hall and George W. Spencer not only called
it a sacred centre, but also reached a similar conclusion that
Kancipuram’s economy did not function in isolation from
political and religious institutions (emphasis added), or from the
values of the Hindu tradition ‘. . . the city’s eminence as a
religious and political centre enhanced its commercial prestige
and rendered its continued prosperity a matter of importance
to its Pallava and Cola suzerains—for as long as they lasted.”!”°
Both these conclusions point to the need for understanding the
role of religious ideology in providing an instrument for the
creation of ‘effective space’ for urban forms and in determining
the nature of the city and its role as the focus of change.
In the early phase of urbanization, we pointed out the absence
of a dominant or formal religion, either in helping to evolve
the institution of kingship and a coercive apparatus for taxation,
or in producing bases of support to an exchange network,
although the stimulus for urban growth was present in the form
of maritime trade. In the early period, the person of the Sangam
chief/king was the object of adulation—a glorious hero whose
authority was based on bravery, success in tribal conflict and
generosity to kinsmen. Ideas relating to physical power, energy
and stature provided the necessary symbols for super-human
power which temporal beings invoked for the exercise of power.
Hence the comparisons with tribal deities of super-human valour
and stature. In the later period, it was more the office of the
king that came to be venerated and hence equated with the
divine in medieval monarchy. God became the transcendental
reference point, and the brahmana priests the agents of legitimiz-
ing temporal sovereignty through divine sanction and fabricated
genealogies of divine descent.
It is not just fortuitous that the spread of the Puranic religion
in the Tamil country coincided with the assumption of sov-
ereignty by the Pallavas and Pandyas, and the practice of land
grants to brahmanas and temples started off that long process
of agrarian development, followed by social and economic
differentiation, generating urban forms. Thus, the control over
the temple, the most important ‘superordinate redistributive
60 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
instrument’, was in the hands of the brahmanas, who through
their sabha, assumed the role of economic administrators. The
creation of such brahmadeyas and temples was an act of valida-
tion by some form of divine authority for the Asatriyas to give
permanence to their power. This, in fact, led to the forging of
a new instrument for the organization of sacred, economic,
social and political space.
Puranic religion came to be established as the vehicle for
propagating a ‘cosmological world view’. It is an extremely
difficult task to trace the processes through which this happened
from the end of the Sangam to the beginning of the Pallava-
Pandya period. Two spheres in which it may be traced are the
acculturation of all local and popular folk traditions of worship,
some of which were imposed on brahmanism and not merely
upgraded due to acculturation, like the tai deities, and their
absorption into the brahmanical religions of Vaisnavism and
Saivism. Evidence of this process comes from the invocatory
verses added to the early Tamil classics, not earlier than the
eighth and ninth centuries AD, when the tradition of the Sangam
itself and the collection of the verses were systematized.'*° It is
only among the later strata of literature like the Panpatal and
the Tirumurukarruppatai, composed long after the akam and
puram poetry, that the universalization of the two deities Mal
(Visnu) and Murukan (Subrahmanya) can be recognized, i.e. the
first traces of a formalized religion with the temple as its locus.
The temple-religion of Visnu was propagated first by the early
alvars (sixth and seventh centuries AD) through the intensely
personal devotional cult of bhakti, the central theme of which
was the transcendental role of religion and central preoccupa-
tion, the attainment of salvation or release (moksa). The bhakti
ideology assisted in the process of enhancing the power of both
the divine and the human sovereigns through the symbolism
of the cosmos/temple/territory.'3!
_ The concept of bhakti acted in two distinct ways in estab
lishing the brahmanical temple as the pivot of the enactment
of the various roles of society. One was by countering the
increasing influence of the ‘heterodox’ religions of Buddhism
and Jainism, leading to their ultimate decline or subordina-
tion.'” The symbol of royal conversion was central to this
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview / 61
conflict. In fact, Jainism, which was more widespread in this
region than Buddhism, became as much a part of the Puranic
religion and temple-based cult as the brahmanical Vaisnavism
and Saivism were. The other was more significant, viz, that it
induced messianic expectations among the lower orders of the
varna-based society through the ideal of salvation. In fact, it is
possible to show that the bsakt: ideal emanated in a context of
social differentiation, where conflicts centered round such dif-
ferentiation and social dominance, as, for example, in Kafici
and Madurai.
The bhakti ideology contained in itself the seeds of sec-
tarianism. Although initially b4akt1, as introduced in its simple
form of devotion in the hymns of the dlvars, helped in the
propagation of Vaisnavism, it soon changed into a tool of
sectarian rivalry as it was perceived in Saivism. Through the
bhakti ideal the latter became a more efficacious instrument of
acculturation for acquiring a wider popular base in the hands
of the Sativa nayanars and, subsequently, because of the royal
patrons, i.e. the Colas, who developed its propensities systemati-
cally. The worship of the /imga, as the royal cult of the Colas,
was of central importance in this acculturation.
The bhakti ideology, with its messianic appeal, also became
amplified into an ethical (moral) system capable of sanctioning
and integrating new values (which the old norms could not
provide) into a coherent and viable synthesis. Correspondingly,
this led to the expansion of the temple’s role as the innovative
focus for restructuring society, and facilitating the advance of
those branches of knowledge concerned with ritual display, 1.c.
science of architecture, sculpture, painting and allied arts and
crafts—in short, iconography.
A discussion of the measures through which the Colas
adopted, elaborated and zealously practised this ideology need
not detain us here, because it has been the theme of many
studies on the Colas and the religious history of this period.
More important for our purposes is the direct relation that such
a patronage had to the evolution of their power structure and
the royal city. This is seen in their direct sponsorship of the
stupendous projects of erecting the two distinctive dravida style
temples in Tafijavur and Gangaikondacolapuram, as an act of
62 y Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
deliberate royal policy in creating a royal centre, in imitation
of the bhakti or sacred centre ‘sung’ by the hymnists. Through
these temples Rajaraja I (985-1014) and Rajendra I (1012-1044)
invoked the temple’s superordinate integrative role in order to
create, as it were, a ceremonial city, the symbol of a centralizing
power.
The focus of political and economic power had shifted
conspicuously even under the late Pallavas and early Colas
from the brahmadeya to the temple. The Pallavas and Pandyas
initiated the art of temple-building for Puranic religion. But
it was the Colas who gave permanence to all cult centres,
replicating the temple’s central role in each one of them,
through a systematic renovation in stone of old shrines and
construction of new ones.'?? The major temple projects were
meant, however, only for the royal/ceremonial centres. The
paraphernalia of the medieval temple mirrored the royal court.
Royal servants and temple servants, the talip-parivaram and the
officials koyirramar were identically perceived and had identical
duties. Above all, the temple idol was taken out in procession
for the benefit of the devotees and the king’s procession, which
followed the same path, was meant for the adulation of his
people. The w/a literature, eulogising the deity as well as the
king, which developed as a genre of Tamil poetry under the
Colas, was meant to establish this identity.'** This almost total
identity is comparable to the cult of the devaraja, which was
of great importance to the medieval kingdoms of Southeast
Asia. In contrast, the medieval ruler of Orissa surrendered his
sovereignty to god Jagannatha of Puri, and the late medieval
kings of South Travancore ruled as representatives of god
Padmanabha of Tiruvanantapuram.
The subtle interplay of the social, economic, religious and
political roles of these institutions is elusive and hard to inter-
pret in empirical terms, unless the contextual evidence is brought
to the fore constantly. It may, perhaps, be done with a certain
degree of efficiency in the case of the Céla royal centre, and
there can be no better example of it than Tafjavar.
Tanjavur, which is located on the southern bank of the
Vadavaru (a distributary of the Vennaru, itself branching off
from the Kaveri), stands at the south-western extremity of the
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview / 63
Kaveri delta, just as the-second royal centre of Gangaikonda-
colapuram stands on the northern edge of the Kaveri delta
beyond the Kollidam river (Coleroon). It commanded access to
the delta region, the perennial resource base of the Colas, thus
affording protection to it, as Gangaikondacolapuram did from
the north. At the time of its capture by Vijayalaya in the middle
of ninth century AD, Tafijai was not more than the centre of a
few scattered village settlements under the Muttaraiyar. Its oc-
cupation was, therefore, dictated by geographical (location) and
strategic considerations. There is no reference to Tafijai as the
seat of the Cola royal family in any other source except the
Cola copper plates, till it suddenly blossomed into a huge temple
town under Rajaraja I, whose monumental project created the
most prestigious temple of the dravida style of architecture.
Henceforth, Tanjavir became the royal centre on which Rayaraja
and his family bestowed lavish attention.
The city’? consisted of an internal circuit around the temple
(ullalat) and an outer circuit of residential quarters (purambad)),
the former meant for the residences of the priestly, administra-
tive and other elite groups and the latter for other professional
and service groups, including the two magaram organizations.
Most of these quarters were named after the king and other
royal members whose retinues lived there.
Royal efforts to ‘create’ this city are recorded on the temple
walls. Over 600 employees were requisitioned for the temple from
villages and towns all over the Cola kingdom, including the peri-
pheral Pandya and Tondaimandalams. Within an estimated span
of seven to eight years (though this estimate is questionable) for
the construction of the temple, a veritable colonization of this
centre took place, suggesting the ‘implanting’ of a royal centre
with all its appendages, including a series of army contingents.'”°
The horizontal stratification of the residential areas is said
to be a familiar picture of the ‘so-called pre-industrial city’. In
such a city ‘there was a completely dominant central ceremonial
complex carefully engineered to align the city with cosmic
structures and forces. The rich and the powerful lived at the
centre while the poor lived at the margins. The markets were
neither central nor dominant but a product of the demands
iG ; ; ie
arising from the nucleation by the ceremonial centre’."’
64 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
The cosmic symbolism of the Tafijavur temple, 1.e. the Raja-
rajesvara, is revealed by its designation as the Daksinameru (the
southern meru or mountain—the axis of the universe) and that
of the deity Daksinaméru Vitankar, a symbolism which also
extended to the city as the centre of the territorial authority of
the Colas. This is also exemplified by the ritual consecration of
the main shrine (vimana) as well as the shrines of the regents
of the eight quarters (asta dikpalas), situated at the cardinal points
near the gates.'3® The city would thus seem to be organized in
‘the earthly space to replicate and symbolize the order which
pertained to the other world structure and this ensured survival
and prosperity’!
The economic outreach of the temple is impressive as it
covered the whole Cola kingdom, villages from all the
mandalams, Malainadu, Gangapadi and Nulambapadi, and even
Ilam (Sri Lanka) or Mummudicélamandalam, being assigned
for its upkeep. The number of villages outside the Cola country
is relatively smaller. Nonetheless, the fact that revenues were to
reach Tanjavur, both in paddy and cash, points to the direct
control exeicised over the peripheral regions, including northern
Sri Lanka. So much for the politics of plunder and the segmen-
tation of power. The sabhas of several villages were entrusted
with the gold deposits of the temple, for payment of interest
in the form of provisions, consumable and other articles for
rituals and festivals, thus establishing a reciprocal outflow of
resources for investment.
The peasantry, artisans and shepherds who supplied the ritual
requirements lived in villages in the immediate vicinity of the
city. The huge quantity of recorded livestock donated to the
temple were entrusted to the shepherds for the supply of milk
products. Movement into and out of Tanjavur was constant, as
some farming activities still continued in the neighbourhood for
the temple. The magaram and itinerant traders (Kongavalar
angadi )a lso conducted a brisk commerce, as 1s evident from the
four markets (amgadis) mentioned in the Tafjavar inscriptions.
The performance of plays (Rajarajesvara Nataka), festivals on
the birth asterisms of the royal family, and similar occasions
for which special endowments were made at the behest of the
rulers, would also substantiate the inseparable nature of the
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview / 65
sacred and secular sphereosf interests. Although the Cola palace
was perhaps located at a place called Vallam, the ceremonial
aspects of the city were centred round the temple. The royal
processional path and that of the deity coincided outside the
main enclosure.
The temple was made into a veritable treasure-house of arts,
through its frescoes representing themes from the stories of the
bhakti saints, bronze images of various deities and the bhakti
saints and sculptures of rich iconographic content. Gangai-
kondacolapuram exhibits all these features to a remarkable
degree, although the details of the city’s organization are not
available from its records.
These two royal centres, however, did not have sanctified
bhakti shrines as their nuclei like the other Cola cities, where
the city grew around bhakti shrines, interspersed with which
were the new shrines erected by the kings both for worship and
as sepulchral monuments of royal members, as in Palaiyarai.
Hence, the royal builders of these two temples had them
sanctified by getting hymns composed in their praise by the
royal preceptor.’ This act points much more clearly to the
need for a sacred association and nucleus for a new settlement,
in this case the royal centre.
Madurai and Kafcipuram, two of the oldest cities of this
region, also possess the characteristics of a ceremonial centre.
However, their antecedents as royal centres may be traced back
to the early historical phase. The poetic imagery of these two
centres in the Sangam classics is rich and illustrative of the
cosmic symbolism attributed to them from early times. Thus,
Kacci (Kafici) is described as the pericarp of the lotus which
issues from the navel of Visnu and Tiraiyan, its ruler, is said to
be oft he lineage of Visnu. In fact a Visnu shrine (oft he reclining
form) is alluded to in the early poems as marking the centre of
the city. Similarly, in Madurai stood the shrine of Krsna in the
heart of the town, which in the early poems is called Kudal
(centre), where, according to conventional description, different
quarters with tall buildings met.'*! The shrine 1s identified with
the present Kidal Alagar temple located in the centre of the
city. However, both these cities did not grow into huge com-
plexes until the time of the Pallavas and the later Pandyas
66 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
respectively. While Kafici developed into a dispersed ceremonial
centre, Madurai assumed its present form only in the late
medieval period under the Ndayakas, when fortifications were
added to it and other cities like Tanjavur.
A comparative study of the royal/ceremonial centre of the
above type with other cities of this period shows that all of
them shared the ceremonial aspects to a great degree. However,
historical differences provide them with certain traits, on the
basis of which typological categories may be distinguished.
Among these, Kudamikku-Palaiyarai and Kaficipuram may be
classified as multi-temple centres, evolving after centuries of
growth from earlier agrarian clusters, each temple which marked
their growth representing the locus of the ceremonial complex
at different chronological points, thus leading to the emergence
of dispersed ceremonial/sacred centres rather than compact
ones.'”
In such centres, the locus of the ceremonial complex shifted
from one temple to another, depending upon that temple which
was erected or patronized by a particular ruler to legitimate his
sovereignty. A third type of urban centre is the sacred centre
which originated and evolved around a single cult centre as a
tirtha or sacred spot, later assuming the character of pilgrimage
centre. To this category may be assigned Chidambaram, Sriran-
gam, Tiruvannamalai and several other centres, where religion
was the major factor in its urban character, which assured its
permanence or continuity in a given cultural region. Chidam-
baram had the added prestige of being the centre of the royal
coronation ceremony under the Colas, for it was the most sacred
temple (Kéyil) to the Saivas, just as Srirangam was to the
Vaisnavas. These two latter types usually have a long history
and pass through successive stages of growth.
Cola attempts to develop the agricultural potential of the wet
zones of the Tamraparni valley, also brought into existence a
fairly extensive urban complex with two new brahmadeyas such
as Rajarajacaturvédimangalam (Mannarkoyil) and Ceravanma-
hadevicaturvédimangalam (Sérmadévi) in Mulli nadu in the
Tirunelveli district. The developmental stages of this complex
are attested to by the records of the eleventh and twelfth
centuries AD." Particularly important was Céravanmahadévi, in
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview / 6
which Rajendra I erected a palace for the Cola-Pandya prince,
who was appointed to govern the Pandya region conquered by
the Colas, and in which arrangements were made for settling
‘hundreds’ of families by giving them house sites.'** Together
with the tanzyurs like Madurantakacaturvédimangalam,'*’ Tiruk-
kalukkunram and others, these centres show a process of agglo-
meration of a series of settlements around them, similar to the
agglomeration designated in tribal societies as sacred territories
administrated by the priesthood. Actual physical agglomeration
also means that ‘citizenship, the crux of belonging, was defined
by a specific religious territorial allegiance’,'** also creating a
hierarchy based on a sacrally defined order.
None of these early medieval cities or towns were fortified
in the sense of being protected by defensive walls, except for
the high enclosures of the temple demarcating the sacred pre-
cincts.'*? For the role of ensuring safety and security of the
people was ‘not by walls against physical enemies’, but was by
religious rites and ritual magic ‘against menaces of nature’, the
mediators between gods and men were the priests, and the
communication system was mediated through worship and
sacrifice (offering).
Thus, the sagaram and the itinerant merchant organizations
were also accommodated in the expanding but effective space
created by the temple centres. In physical terms, it was the
tirumadaivilagam around the temple, where separate quarters
were assigned to the merchant and crafts groups. In south
Indian urbanization, the nagaram was not a commercial city,
i.e. the typology adopted by M.I. Finley for Greek cities.'®
Nor were the trade centres on the routes of itinerant merchants
similar to the ‘burgher’ category of medieval Europe, in the
sense of a separation between country and town. Hall and
Spencer find many essential similarities in the merchant or-
ganizations of long-distance trade in South India and medieval
Europe. But the main difference, they point out, lies in the
absence of the conflicting burgher interests as against the
episcopal or seigneurial authority, i.e. no weakening of relation-
ships with the countryside, despite a separate group conscious-
ness. This is attributed to the superordinate integrative character
of the sacred centres like Kaficipuram.'” In the medieval south
68 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Indian context, all the emergent institutions and urban forms
were merged into a single systemic relationship, for the com-
mercial guilds were accommodated as a substantial component
within the same structure, and had to seek validation ‘within
the norms of a traditional social order’. In effect, therefore,
the network of zagaram, commercial centres and ports brought
together into a tight economic and political web, the royal/
ceremonial/sacred centres.
The question of dominance in all such centres would seem
to be closely related to and clearly reflected in the evolution of
large temple structures from the nucleus of a single shrine.
Stylistically the most remarkable between the seventh and the
eleventh centuries are the royal creations, particularly illustrated
in the verticality of the wimana (shrine), which reached its
culmination under the middle Colas (985-1044), together with
the enclosures and the gateway (gopura). In a sense they represent
the apex of the socio-political hierarchy. The fact that authority
relationships changed during the twelfth and thirteenth cen-
turies introduced a significant variation in the emphasis on
temple architecture, which now shifted to the additional struc-
tures, leading to a horizontal magnification of the temple, te.
structural expansion through a complex of shrines, pillared halls
(mandapas) within the enclosures, each marking a further stage
in the participation of diverse groups in temple-building and
gift-giving activities. The tirumadaivilagam is also a case in point.
Architecturally, the second imposing structure is the gopura'®
which, even in the later period, was mainly the creation of ruling
dynasties and their subordinate chieftains, whereas the inner
spaces of the enclosures (prakara) covered with smaller edifices
were the handiwork oft hose powerful agricultural and commer-
cial communities seeking validation.
Ceremonial centres are regarded as pre-eminent instruments
of orthogenetic transformation.'*' The early medieval city in
South India is an example of such transformation, and was
evolved in a cultural matrix, of which it became at once the
product and the symbol. This culture was itself reared by the
state society that emerged under the Colas. The Cola state evolved
through a steady process of integrating different sub-cultural
zones or pre-existing lineage areas, and became conterminous
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview / 69
with the Tamil macro-region, given the fluctuating cultural
frontiers between the Tamil plains and the Deccan plateau and
the less easily definable frontier separating the Tamil and Andhra
plains, which is more a matter of historical than geographical
differences. The city, therefore, to the contemporary Tamil world,
albeit a limited geographical and cultural entity, was the one
which intensely expressed or epitomized this culture and to which
people were drawn by the symbols of its sacred and ceremonial
functions.
IV
The thirteenth and fourteenth centuries would seem to mark a
watershed in the urban history of South India. To understand
how important this divide was and what rendered it so, one has
to look at the evidence afresh to see what the new features of
the urban landscape were, and what were the connections that
one might have failed to see between these developments, and
the changing pattern of power relationships that evolved under
Vijayanagar. These changes may be seen as the next set of
disjunctive processes in the urbanization of South India. The
process began with the general trend towards militarization and
fragmentation of political power. One aspect of major impor-
tance to the study of the role of merchant organization in the
emergence of towns is the question whether merchants tended
to fortify their settlements, both as a measure of safeguard
against loss of merchandise, and as a centre of power and
domination.'” The earliest such fortified town attested to in
the Tamil region was Karavandapuram (Ukkirankottai) in the
Tirunelveli district, the home of a Vaidya family, which supplied
ministers to the Pandyas of the eighth and ninth centuries AD.
The erection of the fort is credited to an eighth century Pandya
king, and the soldiers on guard at the ramparts are referred to
in the tenth century inscriptions of Rajasimha (III), who built
a big market (péerangadi ) there and left it under the protection
of the merchant guild—the Ayyavole. The temples of this settle-
ment were also left in the charge of armed guards.'” The practice
of stationing armies to protect temples was followed in certain
70 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
areas of importance like newly occupied zones and trade routes
such as Tiruvaliévaram in Tirunelveli district, in the eleventh
century under the Colas,'*4 and Sangramanallir in Coimbatore
district, where the army was required to protect the temple
premises.’
It is not clear whether the ervirappattanas were protected
by defensive walls, for evidence on these settlements would
merely indicate the presence of militant groups of the merchant
bodies. The stocking of commodities (for sale or distribution)
in places known as carigaikkottai (literally Toll-fort), seems
to have been a regular practice under the late Colas and
later Pandyas, as indicated by the Mannargudi (Tanjavur
district) inscriptions referring to madigais (is it maligai?—
grocery or provision stores).'°° The emergence of cakravartis
among the merchants has been mentioned earlier, indicating
a tendency on the part of some merchants in the thirteenth
century to assume titles of superior status and influence.
Interestingly, the increasing importance and power of the
merchant bodies in the thirteenth century is also reflected,
if not in the type of closed towns of western Europe, in
the militarily protected (fortified) towns called viradalam and
saradalam,'*’ tending to intrude among the traditional power
bases of the agrarian elite and chiefly families. Could this
be taken to point to a new trend in the rise of urban
power groups in the form of merchant entrepreneurs?
There is evidence of a general parcelling out of various regions
under petty chiefs by the Pandyas, both as a measure of
counteracting the increasing intrusion of the Hoysalas into the
Tamil country, as well as promoting the overseas trade, which
at this time continued to be on the increase. Thus were created
a series of strongholds under Pandya subordinates near those
centres where the Hoysalas had established military stations'*®
or garrisons. Mali Fatan, the Pandya port of Dévipattinam, was
assigned to Abdur Rahman, their Muslim political and com-
mercial agent, who was even permitted the kingly privilege of
reading the Khutha in his name.'* Interestingly, many of the
Hoysala military stations were centres where the merchant or-
ganizations, agricultural guild and their caraigaikkottais with
madigais were also located, suggesting that the line of Hoysala
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview / 71
stations had a definite commercial motive behind their estab-
lishment. The Vijayanagar militarization was apparently a con-
tinuation of the Pandya reaction to the Hoysala intrusion, as
well as a defensive measure against the new technology of defence
and warfare brought in by the Muslim rulers. Another element
of change was the rise of the monastic tradition among the
Vaisnavas and Saivas with powerful lineages, which acquired
control over temple administration and landed property in
various strongholds of these two religions. This is traceable to
an attempt on the part of both the sects to expand their social
base through reforms, with the result that the northern San-
skritic tradition and the southern Tamil tradition created a
schism among the Srivaisnavas (Vadakalai and Tenkalai) with
their separate monastic lineages. The Saivas established powerful
non-brahmana lineages as custodians of the Saiva Siddhanta
canon, on the basis of the support from the vélalas, the merchant
and weaver (kazkkola) groups.
During the Vijayanagar period the mercantile community
seems to have entered into new forms of contractual relation-
ships, especially with the new loci of power, and eventually
came to terms with the shift in the major centre of power to
the Tungabhadra region in Karnataka under the Vijayanagar
rulers. Craft organization strengthened itself by moving out
of purely local contexts. The weaver communities, of which
the katkkolas displaced the saliyas as the most influential group,
now organized themselves into a Mahanadu of supra-local
character, with its headquarters at Kafcipuram.'® With the
emergence of merchant entrepreneurs and master craftsmen
favourable conditions for a new form of economic inter-
dependence were created.'®
Militarization of the state under Vijayanagar also brought
into existence a new set of fortified urban centres of the
subordinate mayaka chiefs, generally on hills and in other older
political or royal centres, which were now converted into a
new kind of militarily viable fortified towns (Madurai and
Tafjavur). Counterposed to them were the old temple and
pilgrimage centres, where power relationships were still estab-
lished through religious heads and monastic lineages. A new
alliance was forged with powerful monastic heads, authority
72 A Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
was shared but dominance remained strictly at the political
level of the state, exemplified by its kingship. Some of the
sacred centres became supra-regional pilgrimage centres (Tiru-
pati, Tiruvannamalai, Kafcipuram and Srirangam) where the
question of dominance was resolved by the re-affirmation of
the deity’s supremacy, as evidenced by the Sthalapuranas.
The multiple loci of power and militarization, rending the
—ee—o eee
fabric of the unitary culture of the Cola period, left the old
ideological apparatuses incapable of preventing the gradual
secularization of political power, although the ceremonial/
political centte still retained the traditional symbols of valida-
tion. Secularization first appears in the physical demarcation of
the royal centre through special ramparts from the sacred
complex, the sacred aspects of the earlier ideological tradition
dominating the religious complex, and the ceremonial and
military aspects of the new urban forms dominating the royal
residential or administrative complex, as in Hampi.'® It is also
seen in the greater emphasis laid on ceremonies like Maha-
navami centering round the royal person rather than the tutelary
deity. The processes are not easy to discern, but the differentia-
tion of political and religious authority is expressed through
the increasing dependence of political power on a balance of
forces between the secular and sacral leadership. The dichotomy
was not between the rulers and ruled, for it was now replaced
by a quadripartite division, in which cultural, religious and
politico-military elites were opposed to lower rural (peasant) and
urban (predominantly artisan and merchant) groups.'® Hence
the differentiation in sacred and secular domains.
The entry of the European companies with their joint stock
formation introduced a further element of change in the seven-
teenth century ap, followed by colonialism, when the factory
replaced the temple as the nucleus of a different type of urban
centre in the coastal areas.
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview J 73
References
This is seen in the following works: P. Niyogi, Contributions to the
Economic History of Northern India: From the Tenth to the Twelfth
Century ap, Calcutta, 1962, chapter v on “Towns and Town-
planning’; K.C. Jain, Ancient Cities and Towns of Rajasthan: A Study
of Culture and Crvilisation, Delhi, 1972; O.P. Prasad, ‘A Study of
Towns in Karnataka on the Basis of Epigraphic Sources’, /ndian
History Congress (IHC) Proceedings of the 38th Session (1977), 151-60
and ‘Two Ancient Port Towns of Karnataka’, /ndian History Congress
(IHC) Proceedings of the 39th Session (1978), 55-61. In works on
economic history also a similar tendency is seen, e.g. G.R. Kup-
puswamy, Economic Conditions in Karnataka, AD 973-Ap 1336, Dhar-
war, 1975; as also in works on historical geography sce P.K.
Bhattacharya, Historical Geography of Madhya Pradesh from Early
Records, Delhi, 1977. Some attempt at understanding the causative
factors in urban growth in early Tamilakam is made by T.K.
Venkatasubramanian see ‘Growth of Urban Centres in Early
Tamilakam’, JHC, 43rd Session, Kurukshetra, 1982.
B.D. Chattopadhyaya, ‘Trade and Urban Centres in Early
Medieval India’, /ndian Historical Review (IHR), vol. 1, no. 2, 1974;
idem “Urban Centres in Early Medieval India: An Overview’, in
Sabyasachi Bhattacharya and Romila Thapar (eds), Situating In-
dian History, New Delhi, 1986; Champakalakshmi, ‘Growth of
Urban Centres in South India: Kudamikku-Palaiyarai, the Twin-
city of the Colas’, Studies in History, 1979, vol. 1, no. 1, see Chapter
6 in this volume; idem “Urban Processes in Early Medieval Tamil
Nadu’, in Situating Indian History, see Chapter 4 in this volume;
also K.R. Hall, ‘Peasant State and Society in Chola Times: A View
from the Tiruvidaimarudir Urban Complex’, The Indian Economic
and Social History Review (IESHR), 1981, vol. 18, nos 3-4.
Philip Abrams, “Towns and Economic Growth’, in Philip Abrams
and E.A. Wrigley (eds), Towns in Societies: Essays in Economic History
and Historical Sociology, Cambridge, 1978.
Harold Carter, An Introduction to Urban Historical Geography,
London, 1983, Foreword, xiv.
Richard Basham, Urban Anthropology: The Cross-Cultural Study of
Complex Societies, Palo Alto, California, 1978, 51.
Chattopadhyaya, ‘Urban Centres’, 11-13. The use of the term
‘third urbanization’ for the whole of India may be necessary, if
one takes the Indus valley urbanization into account. However,
for south India, it should be taken as ‘the second urbanization’.
74 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
See Champakalakshmi, ‘Urban Processes in Early Medieval Tamil
Nadu’, in Indu Banga (ed.), The City in Indian History: Urban
Demography History and Politics, 1991, 47-68.
. Chattopadhyaya, ‘Urban Centres’, 11. See also A. Ghosh, The City
in Early Historical India, Simla, 1973. S. Ratnagar, Encounters: The
Westerly Trade of the Harappa Civilization, New Delhi, OUP, 1981,
X11.
_ R.S. Sharma, Indian Feudalism, Calcutta, 1965, 65ff. Also his
‘Decay of Gangetic Towns in Gupta and Post-Gupta Times’, JHC,
33rd Session, Muzaffarpur, 1972, 92-104.
This phase is discussed in Section 11 of this Chapter.
For the widening orbit of trade and its rippling effects over the
Ganges valley in this period, see Thapar, ‘State Formation in Early
India’, International Social Science Journal, vol. xa, 655-69.
. K. Sivathamby, ‘Early South Indian Society and Economy: The
Tinai Concept’, Social Scientist, 1974, 20-37, gives a very useful
appraisal of the tivai concept for understanding these eco-zones.
Champakalakshmi, ‘Urban Processes’, 48.
For the essential features of a janapada, see Thapar, From Lineage
to State, OUP, Bombay, 1984, 121ff.
. Champakalakshmi, “Archaeology and Tamil Literary Tradition’,
Puratattva, 1975-6, vol. vin, 113ff.
‘Surpluses are always defined and mobilized in a particular
institutional setting’, R. McC. Adams, The Evolution of Urban
Society: Early Mesopotamia and Pre-hispanic Mexico, Chicago, 1966,
45-7. In other words, surplus is a social product.
16. R.S. Kennedy, ‘King in Early South India as Chieftain and
Emperor’, JHR, 1976, vol. i, 2. Patronage and liberality towards
bards and minstrels were the most important means of legitima-
tion of the kingly office, so much so that jewels, gold, elephants,
chariots and fine clothes were distributed to the panar, akavunar
and porunar, (minstrels) for praising the qualities of leadership
and liberality, thus justifying his position.
Champakalakshmi, ‘Archaeology’, 120; Nicholas B. Dirks, ‘Politi-
cal Authority and Structural Change in Early South India’,
IESHR, 1976, vol. xi, no. 2, 125-57. Also Purananuru, 16, 224,
367, 377, 400.
‘Tribal conflicts are endemic to non-urbanised societies at all
levels of development and are not necessarily self augmenting’.
See Paul Wheatley, The Pivot of the Four Quarters: A Preliminary
Enquiry into the Origin and Character of the Ancient Chinese City,
Edinburgh, 1971, 301.
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview / 75
29. For inter-tinai exchange, see J.V. Chelliah, Pattuppattu-The Ten
Tamil Idylls (tr. into English with Introduction and Notes),
Tirunelveli, S/SSW, 2nd edn, 1962, 73-5; Porunararruppatai, lI.
214-25.
Akananiru, 36, 57, 125, 246, 253 and 345; Purananuru, 7-9, 23,
20.
25, 31-2, 33, 35-6, 39-40, 227, 371 ff. Kuruntokat, 393. See K.A.
Nilakanta Sastri, The Colas, Madras, 1975, 30. The pearl-rich Pandya
coastal region and the pepper-rich hilly tracts of the Céras must
have been a constant source of conflict among the three ‘crowned
kings’. The Cola interest in these areas is well known.
21. Sivathamby, “An Analysis of the Anthropological Significance of
the Economic Activities and Conduct Code Ascribed to the mullai
tinat, Proceedings of the First International Conference Seminar on
Tamil Studies, 1966 (1968), LATR, vol. 1, 325.
22. G.W. Spencer, The Politics of Expansion: The Cola Conquest of Sn
Lanka and Sn Vijaya, Madras, 1983, 17-18.
23. Purunanuru, 15, 16, 23, 52, 57; Pattinappalai, \\. 239-68;
Maduratkkanci, \\. 148-76. Also Rajan Gurukkal, “Aspects of Early
Iron Age Economy, Problems of Agrarian Expansion of Tamila-
kam’, IHC, 42nd Session, Bodh Gaya, 1981, 74.
24. Perumpanarruppatai (on Kacci), ll. 373-412; K. Zvelebil, The Smile
of Murugan, Leiden, 1973, 100. See R. Sumathi, ‘Trade and its
Impact on the Early Tamils: The Cola Experience’, M.Phil.
Dissertation (unpublished), Jawaharlal Nehru University, 1984,
chapter ul.
yAS In contrast to the urban centres of marutam and neital, the
mudur of the other tracts described in the Malaipatukatam, and
Cirupdnarruppatai seem to have been merely camps of the chief-
tains of the hilly-pastoral tracts.
26. The concept of a ‘gateway city’ has been discussed by Burghardt
as an alternative to the central place theory. That such cities are
fed by a ‘dendritic network’ is not indicated in the case of Puhar.
See Burghardt, ‘A Hypothesis About Gateway Cities’, Annals of
the Association ofA merican Geographers, 1971, vol. tx; also K. Hirth,
‘International Trade and the Formation of Pre-historic Gateway
Communities’, American Antiquity, 1978, vol. xu, 38. J. Bird
mentions another type of gateway city which is an ‘exchange
gateway, where ‘there is mature exchange of products in two or
more directions’, but does not discuss it in detail. See Bird,
Centrality and Cities, Routledge, London, 1977, 119.
27. Each inland capital undoubtedly had links with its port. The
existence of routes connecting the inland towns with the coastal
76 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
towns is known from the Cirupanarruppatai (\\. 142-3) and
Perumpanarruppatai (||. 319, 371-3). See also N. Subrahmanian,
Sangam Polity, 1966, 123. However, a network of routes connecting
various other smaller settlements and nodal points with the ports
is hardly attested to. See K.V. Soundararajan, ‘Determinant Factors
in the Early History of Tamil Nad’, Journal of Indian History (/1H),
1967, part 1. Network also means an organized commercial system
in which urban institutions develop, which in the Tamil region
did not.
28. L.R. Binford, ‘Archaeology and Anthropology’, in L. Binford
(ed.), An Archaeological Perspective, New York, 20-32. The stress was
on exporting and importing elite and treasure goods, viz., Roman
wine, gold, Yavana lamps and guards, horses and gems.
Z2. Pattinappalai, \\. 120-36. The description of Puhar in Pattinap-
palai suggests an elaborate and fair-sized town with well-defined
quarters for merchants and officials, with their shops and offices
and residential quarters.
30. Archaeological finds identifiable as remains of dyeing vats are
reported from Uraiyur and Arikamédu. Kacci and Madurai, the
well known textile centres, have not provided similar finds. For
Uraiyur, see Indian Archaeology: A Review (IAR), 1964-5, 25-6;
1965-6, 26; 1967-8, 30-1; and for Arikamédu, R.E.M. Wheeler
et al. ‘Arikamedu—An Indo-Roman Trading Station on the East
Coast of India’ in Ancient India, 1946, no. 2. Madurai is referred
to in the Arthasastra, as one of the centres for the best cotton
fabrics and ‘Argaritic Muslins’ of the Cola country, probably
from Uraiydr, are referred to in the Periplus: 59, see also Cham-
pakalakshmi, ‘Archaeology’.
31. Kaverippattinam excavations reported in LAR, 1961-2; 1963-4;
see also Champakalakshmi, ‘Archaeology’, 113.
3é Clarence Maloney, ‘The Beginnings of Civilization in South
India’, Journal of Asian Studies (JAS), 1970, vol. xxx, no. 3, 603-16;
idem ‘Archaeology in South India—Accomplishments and Pros-
pects’, in B. Stein (ed.), Essays on-South India, New Delhi, 1976,
1-40.
ai I am thankful to Y. Subbarayalu for the information on Kodu-
manal, where he has been excavating for several seasons from
1984.
34. R.E.M. Wheeler et al., ‘Arikamedu’; Warmington, Commerce Be-
tween the Roman Empire and India, New Delhi, 1974 reprint; T.V.
Mahalingam, Report on the Excavations in the Lower Kaveri Valley:
Tirukkampuliyur and Alagarai, 1962-64, Madras, 1970; J. Filliozat,
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview A 77
‘Intercourse of India with the Roman Empire During the Open-
ing Centuries of the Christian Era’, //H, part 1, vol. xxv, 23-44;
Hall, ‘The Expansion of Maritime Trade in the Indian Ocean;
Roman Trade in the Indian Ocean—An Indian Perspective’, The
Elmira Review, vol. 1, 36-42; R. Nagaswamy, ‘Exploration and
Excavation’, Damilica, 1970, vol. 1; Vasavasamudram, Madras
(Tamil Nadu State Department of Archaeology), 1978; K.S.
Ramachandran, Archaeology of South India, Delhi, 1980.
35. Purananuru, 29, 123 and 125. See Gurukkal, ‘Early Iron Age
Economy’, 75, for continuity of tribal traditions under the
Vendar, ‘crowned kings’.
36. The generous gifts to poets and bards included elephants, horses,
gold, gems etc. Poets and bards sharing the king’s feast and the
intimacy of patron-client relationship are a part of this redistribu-
tion and prestation economy.
37. Pattinappalat, \\. 120-36. The sea-faring interests of the Tamil
rulers, which must have led to the special care bestowed by them
on the ports, are obviously derived from a remote past hinted at
in the poems claiming that the Colas were descendants of an
ancestor who harnessed the monsoon winds for sea trade. See
Nilakanta Sastri, History of South India, OUP, 1958, 124; Maloney,
‘The Effect of Early Coastal Sea Traffic on the Development of
Civilization in South India’, Ph.D. thesis (unpublished), Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania, Microfilm xeroxography, 1968, 150, and
‘The Beginnings of Civilization in South India’, JAS, 1970, vol.
xxix, no. 3, 615.
38. S. Seneviratne, ‘Kalinga and Andhra: The Process of Secondary
State Formation in Early India’, in Claessen, and Skalnik (eds),
The Study of the State, Mouton, The Hague, 1981, 320.
39. The bards sought the patronage of the ‘crowned kings’ as well as
the tribal chiefs. The main theme around which the Arruppatai
works were composed relates to patronage and the lament of the
poets about the decline of the patron-client relationship, possibly
a reference to the decline of the chiefdoms or a reluctance on
the part of the Vendar to give generous gifts. See G.L. Hart, Poets
of the Tamil Anthologtes—Ancient Poems of Love and War, Princeton,
1979, 176.
40. M. Sahlins, Tribesman, Prentice Hall, Engelwood Cliffs, 1968; M.
Fried, The Evolution of Political Society, New York, 1967.
41. R. Kailasapathy, Tamil Heroic Poetry, OUP, 1968, 11-13, 73-4 and
260; Hart, ‘Ancient Tamil Literature: Its Scholarly Past and
Future’, in Stein (ed.), Essays on South India, New Delhi, 1976,
78 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
56-7, see also K. Sivaraja Pillai, Chronology of the Early Tamils,
Madras, 1932, 192-3 for the nature of social differentiation.
42. This is, in fact, what the medieval commentator on Jolkappiyam
makes out from the reference in that work. See N. Subrahmanian,
1966, 259.
43. See Champakalakshmi, ‘Archaeology’, for areas over which the
vélir exercised control.
44. Groups designated as vambalar, umanar, paratavar, vanikar,
vilainar and pakarnar, would refer to the itinerant trader or the
new comer, salt trader, fisher and trader merchant, seller and
hawker respectively. See Tamil Lexicon, Ww, 2380 and 2496; v, 2380;
vi, 3492, 3586 and 3715.
45. Zvelebil, Murugan, 100.
46. The fact that the paratavar diversified their economic activities
and became rich traders (Akananuru, 340; 16-17; 350: 11) and
their prosperity as described in the poems may well be a develop-
ment due to maritime trade. The coastal paratavar who are earlier
portrayed as a rustic, happy and simple folk (Maloney, ‘Early
Coastal Sea Traffic’, 231-2) subsequently enhanced their eco-
nomic status through extensive trade, and acquired a better
life-style. Sea trade was particularly important to them. They
worshipped Varuna and the chank (conch) was of special cult
significance to them.
47. The earliest craft well attested to as a specialised one was weaving.
Tirumurukarruppatat, 138 and Porunararruppatai, 81-3, of the later
strata of Sangam works.
48. I, Mahadevan, ‘Corpus of the Tamil Brahmi Inscriptions’, in
Nagaswamy (ed.), Seminar on Inscriptions, Madras, 1966 (1968),
nos 3 and 6. The term Kaviti is taken to be a guild chief by
Sivathamby, ‘The Social and Historical Perspective (of the Early
Tamil Poems)’, in Sivathamby, Drama in Ancient Tamil Society,
New Century Book House, 1981, 172. However, the references
to the Kavitis position and functions would seem to indicate
that he was more a counsellor to the ruling chiefs/kings. This is
the meaning attributed to the term by historians like Nilakanta
Sastri and N. Subramanian. See Sangam Polity, 1966, 86 and 96.
49. Silappadikaram, \: 33. A Vanikaccattu (merchant caravan) is men-
tioned in Kuruntokai, 390. It had armed escorts. Akananuru, 89.
See Subramanian, Sangam Polity, 235. Also, the same author’s
Pre-Pallavan Tamil Index, Madras, 1966, 667.
50. * Pillay, A Soctal History of the Tamils, Madras, 1975, reprint,
247.
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview F 79
51. T.G. Aravamuthan, “A Pandiyan Issue of Punch-marked Coins’,
Journal of the Numismatic Society of India, part 1, vol. vi, 1f f.
52. The “Cengam hoard’ from Andipatti in the North Arcot district
is assigned to the chief Nannan of Cengam, referred to in the
Matlaipatukatam.
53. Tolkapptyam, Porul: 625-6, 632 and 635. That this division hardly
applied to the whole of the Tamil society or that it was not a
well-understood framework, is seen in references to the four
categories, which include people like tudtyar, panar, paratyar and
kadambar—Purananum, 335.
54. The paratyar, panar, tudtyar and others. See Hart, The Poems of the
Anaent Tamils—Their Milieu and their Sanskrit Counterparts, 1975,
119ff; Maloney, ‘Archaeology in South India’, 17.
55. Most of these donations are of a comparatively simple nature
(carving of stone beds and making natural caverns habitable for
monks) and do not match the ostentatiousness of the contem-
porary donations in western Deccan and Andhra Region. See
Vidya Dehejia, Early Buddhist Rock Cut Temples: A Chronological
Study, London, 1972; Anjana Chatterjee, ‘Socio-economic Condi-
tions in Early Andhra 200 sc-ap 300: A Study of the Transition
from Megalithic to Early Historic Culture’, Ph.D. thesis (un-
published), Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, 1976.
56. The present ‘vellatyan iruppu’ in Kavérippumpattinam is said to
be the site of an ancient yavana colony. See Pattinappalai, ll.
214-18; Silappadikaram, v, 6-12; vi, 130-3; 143.
57. Champakalakshmi, ‘Archaeology’. An attempt is made in this
essay to correlate archaeological evidence from the Megalithic
burials and their distribution with the literary evidence of the
anthologies and epics.
58. Manimekalai, chapter i, 67-8. The structural features of the
Megalithic burials show that they would have involved consider-
able expenditure and manpower. See K.R. Srinivasan, ‘Some
Aspects of Religion as Revealed by Early Monuments and Litera-
ture of the South’, Journal of the Madras University, 1960, vol. xxxu,
no. 1, 133-4.
oo: McC Adams, The Evolution of Urban Soctety, 2.
60. ‘It is precisely the growth of the collective symbols and institu-
tions of the primitive states that can explain the conversion of
peasant leisure into foodstuffs in urban store-houses’, Adams,
Evolution, 45.
61. Maloney, ‘Early Coastal Sea Traffic’.
62. Before Kautilya there seems to have been a general preference for
80 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
open sea routes, whereas Kautilya gives importance to land routes
and sea routes that followed the coast. (Arthasastra, vu, 12).
63. It is doubtful whether at this early stage there were many traver-
sable paths in the intercourse of the Tamil country. See Soun-
dararajan, ‘Determinant Factors’, 667.
64. Champakalakshmi, ‘Urban Processes’, 51.
65. Himanshu P. Ray, Monastery and Guild: Commerce Under the
Satavahanas, OUP, 1986, chapter 1.
66. Ibid., chapter 5.
67. Thapar, A History of India, vol. 1, 111-12; Dehejia, 1972 and
Chatterjee, ‘Early Andhra’. The sponsoring of Buddhist institu-
tions by kings and merchants alike, and the rise of mercantile
establishments, served as ‘symbolic integrative media for a domin-
ant politico-mercantile elite’. See J. Heitzman, ‘Early Buddhism,
Trade and Empire’, Journal of Southeast Asian Studies, March 1989,
vol. xx, no. 1, 121-37.
68. Seneviratne, ‘Kalinga and Andhra: The Process of Secondary State
Formation in Early India’.
69. See M.G.S. Narayanan, ‘The Warrior Settlements of the Sangam
Age’, IHC, 43rd Session, Kurukshetra, 1982, 102-9; Gurukkal,
‘Early Iron Age Economy’, 70-82. For frequent inter-tribal wars
and strifes there is abundant evidence see Kailasapathy, Tamil
Heroic Poetry, 258-60.
70. Webb uses the term ‘conditional state’ to describe highly
developed, sometimes durable chiefdoms which appear to be
transitional to the state, and in which the transformation may
never take place. ‘The lack of a reliable source of force which
may be applied in a crisis’ makes ‘obedience of the separate
segments of a society to the leadership’ conditional. It is the
element ofc oercion, which is emphasized here as a distinguishing
feature of the state from other elementary forms of political
organizations. See M. Webb, ‘The Flag Follows Trade—An Essay
on the Necessary Interaction ofMi litary and Commercial Factors
in State Formation’, in Sabloff and Lamberg Karlovsky (eds),
Ancient Civilization and Trade, Albuquerque, 1975, 156ff. These
early Tamil chiefdoms disappeared into oblivion rather suddenly
and dramatically, see Champakalakshmi, ‘Urban Processes’, 51.
For lack of coercive power among the Vendar, see Gurukkal, “Early
Iron Age Economy’, 76.
71. See Ratnagar, Encounters, 240, R.A.LH., Gunawardana, ‘Social
Function and Political Power: A Case Study of the Evolution of
the State in Irrigation Society’, in Classen and Skalnik (eds), The
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview / 81
Study of the State, 1981, 145ff R. Cohen, ‘State Origins: A
Reappraisal’, in Claessen and Skalnik (eds), The Early State, The
Hague, 44-5.
72. Adams, Evolution, 46-7.
73. V. Gordon Childe, ‘The Urban Revolution’, Town Planning
Review, 1950, 29, 3-17. Two of the important criteria listed by
Gordon Childe, namely, the freeing of a part of the population
from subsistence tasks for full-time craft specialization, and the
substitution of a politically organized society based on territorial
principles—the state—for one based on kin ties, were absent in
this phase.
74. Adams, Evolution, 9.
i See also B.N.S. Yadava, “The Accounts of the Kali Age and the
Social Transition from Antiquity to the Middle Ages’, /HR (July
1978-Jan. 1979), vol. v, nos 1-2, 61; Also Spencer, ‘Religious
Networks and Royal Influence in 11th Century South India’,
Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Onent (JESHO),
1969, part 1, vol. xu, 47. It has been argued that the decline of
trade in the 3rd century ap was followed by the decay of towns
in north India, for which archaeological evidence has been cited.
(R.S. Sharma, JHC, 33rd Session, Muzaffarpur, 1972, 92-104).
These decaying towns, it is suggested, were converted into
tirthas or places of pilgrimage in early medieval times. See R.N.
Nandi, ‘Client, Ritual and Conflict in Early Brahmanical Order’,
IHR, 1979-80, vol. vi, nos 1 and 2.
. The Kural, which extols the importance of agriculture, seems to
provide a clue by referring to the breakdown of political ethics
causing strain on the cultivators due to forcible demands.
Adams, Evolution, 18.
See Chapters 4 and 6 in this volume.
._ The text oft his inscription remains unpublished, but preliminary
reports clearly refer to lands ‘granted’ to brahmanas. Pulankuricci
is in the semi-arid Ramanathapuram district. See Nagaswamy, ‘An
Outstanding Epigraphical Discovery in Tamil Nadu’, Fi/th Inter
national Conference Seminar on Tamil Studies, Madurai, 1981.
80. See Chapter 4 in this volume.
81. There is no single monograph to date which has failed to
recognize this, yet a major methodological and analytical dif-
ference exists between the earlier ‘conventional’ historiography
of South India and the recent studies. The difference 1s also one
of static and dynamic, or narrative and analytical frameworks in
these two approaches, e.g. C. Minakshi, Administration and Social
S2 Ps Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Life Under the Pallavas, Rev. 2nd edn, Madras, 1977; Mahalingam,
South Indian Polity, Madras, 1955; Nilakanta Sastri, The Colas,
Madras, and so on. Contra, Sharma, Indian Feudalism, Calcutta,
1975; Stein, Peasant State and Society in Medieval South India, OUP,
1980; N. Karashima, South Indian History and Society: Studtes from
Inscriptions av 850-1800, OUP, 1984, and so on.
82. Chattopadhyaya, ‘Political Processes and Structure of Polity in
Early Medieval India: Problems of Perspective’, Presidential Address,
Ancient India Section, IHC, 44th Session, Burdwan, 1983, 16. /dem
The Making of Early Medieval India, OUP, 1994.
83. Stein, Peasant State, Chapter on ‘The State and the Agrarian
Order’; Spencer, 1983.
84. C. Minakshi, Administration and Social Life, chapter vu; T.M.
Srinivasan, ‘Irrigation and Water Supply in South India up to
AD 1300’, M.Litt. Thesis (unpublished), Madras, 1968, for the
Pallava region, where the connections are completely missed. /dem
‘A Brief Account of the Ancient Irrigation Engineering Systems
Prevalent in South India’, The Indian Journal of History of Science,
1970, vol. 5, no. 2; Gurukkal, “The Agrarian System and Socio-
Political Organisation Under the Early Pandyas c ap 600-1000’,
Ph.D. Thesis (unpublished), Jawaharlal Nehru University, 1984,
chapter 11, where the links are clearly understood.
85. It has also been suggested that in this period, there is evidence
of inter-societal technology transfer in irrigation between South
India and Sri Lanka. Gunawardana, ‘Inter Societal Transfer of
Hydraulic Technology in Pre-colonial South Asia: Some Reflec-
tions Based on a Preliminary Investigation’, Tonan Ajia Kenkyu
(South East Asian Studies), Sept. 1984, vol. 22, no. 2. In both the
Pallava and Pandya regions, perennial and inundation techniques
were extensively used in areas suitable for such methods, a practice
which was prevalent from the Sangam Period. There are literary
traditions associating Karikala Cola of the Sangam period with
a major irrigation work (dam) on the Kaveri near Tiruchirappalli
(Uraiyur), and the deforestation of the northern Tamil region in
order to settle 48,000 Vélala families. Although it may refer to
such activities even prior to the brahmadeya period, there is no
clear evidence that this irrigation project, believed to have been
carried out with slave labour (prisoners of war), was successfully
managed by the Colas of the Sangam period. In fact, a study of
the present site of this dam points to a medieval date for the
dam. In this context, the views of D. Ludden may be mentioned.
Developing river irrigation was part of building regional political
~ Phases of Urbanization: An Overview / 83
order. The sangam period technology was rudimentary, based
solely on inundation’; and, ‘The dam and channel systems in the
up-river tracts, were highly productive, but the Tamraparni region
near Ambasamudram was the locus of the most dramatic agricul-
tural and political development under the Medieval dynasties’,
‘Patronage and Irrigation in Tamil Nadu, A Long Term View’,
JESHR, 1979, vol. xvi, no. 3, 349ff. See also D. Ludden, Peasant
History in South India, Princeton, 1985, chapter 1. Under the Pandyas
of the later period, the strengthening of the bunds of existing
tanks and construction of several new ones are recorded in the
eighth-ninth century inscriptions. The use of stone for the new
bunds and the special technique of sluice construction to regulate
water supply are also attested to for the first time in these records
as well as in those of the Pallavas. See Gurukkal, ‘Aspects of the
Reservoir System of Irrigation in the Early Pandya State’, Studies
in History, n.s., vol. , no. 2, 155-64; Minakshi, chapter vu; T.M.
Srinivasan, ‘Irrigation and Water Supply’, see also D. Ludden,
‘Ecological Zones and the Cultural Economy of Irrigation in
Southern Tamil Nadu’, JAS, n.s., 1978, vol. 1, no. 1.
86. It may be noted that invariably all the brahmadeya records show
an intimate knowledge of astronomy, evidently on the part of
the brahmanas, the grantees, by their references to eclipses and
other astronomical phenomena, apart from the methods of
dating, which include precise calendraic details, a boon to chro-
nologists, who have been able to date many such records with
great exactitude.
87. When new settlements were brought into existence through brah
madeya or agrahara grants, the expansion of the revenue base 1s
implied in the phrase that such villages were ‘non-taxable for
twelve years’, after which they would be brought under the taxable
category. See T.V. Mahalingam, ‘Genesis and Nature of Feudalism
under the Pallavas of Kanci’, Paper presented at the Seminar on
Socio-Economic Formation in the Early Middle Ages—av 600-1200,
Allahabad, 1977. This is also illustrated by the references in
Karnataka inscriptions recording the scttlement of agraharas.
Sometimes, the revenue dues from such agraharas were also fixed
in cash. See S. Leela Shanthakumari, History of the Agraharas,
Karnataka 400-1300, Madras, 1986, 16-17.
88. Gurukkal, ‘The Agrarian Society’, chapter m1, 168ff. Tax terms
like puravu-pon, puravu-vari (land tax) dyam, kanam, dandam, karai,
and kadamai are commonly found in Pallava-Pandya records.
That revenue demands were on the increase in the early medieval
84 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
period shows that agricultural surplus sustained the ruling and
non-ruling elites of the period. This is much more clearly attested
under the Colas. See Chattopadhyaya, ‘Political Processes’, 16. It
has been argued that the devotional cult of bhakti, the personal
devotion to the deity, symbolizes the tenant-lord or cultivator-
landlord relationship of a feudal society, or justifies it, perhaps,
by providing ‘the delusion of equality among the lower orders
which in reality remained beyond their access even in the ritual
area’. See R.N. Nandi, ‘Some Social Aspects of Nalayira Divya
Prabandham’, JHC, 37th Session, Calicut, 1976, 118-23; Kesavan
Veluthat, ‘The Temple Base of the Bhakti Movement in South
India’, JHC, 40th Session, Waltair, 1979, 185-94. Here, bhakti in
effect represents the extra-economic coercion or bond enabling
the circulation of resources, i.e. devotion to, and a reciprocal
protection from, the deity. See for non-economic considerations
in social relations, P. Anderson, Passage from Antiquity to Feudalism,
London, 1974, 401ff, Maurice Dobb, Capitalism, Development and
Planning, The Hague, 1971, 208.
89. This is the main theme in all the works ofS tein, the culmination
of his researches being his monograph, Peasant State and Society
in Medieval South India. There are many influenced by Stein’s
theory among American historians ofs outh India, such as Spencer
and Hall. bi
90. The best exposition of this theory is that of Indian Feudalism by
Sharma. Despite the fact that it has provoked a continuing debate
on the prevalence of a feudal society in India on the European
model (Harbans Mukhia, ‘Was There Feudalism in Indian
History’, Presidential Address, IHC, Section u, Waltair, 1977; see also
Sharma, “How Feudal was Indian Feudalism’ and Stein ‘Politics
Peasants and Deconstruction of Feudalism in Medieval India’ in
Journal of Peasant Studies, Jan/April 1985, vol. 12, nos 2 and 3),
there are quite a few proponents of this theory. The series of
Presidential addresses in the IHC on this subject are sufficient
proof of it. See D.N. Jha, ‘Eafly Indian Feudalism: A His-
toriographical Critique’, Presidential Address Ancient India Section,
Indian History Congress, 40th Session, Waltair, 1979; B.N.S. Yadava,
‘The Problems of the Emergence of Feudal Relations in Early
India’, Presidential Address, Ancient India Section, IHC, 41st Session,
Bombay, 1980; Nandi, ‘Growth of Rural Economy in Early Feudal
India’, JHC, 45th Session, Annamalai, 1984.
91. Veluthat, The Political Structure of Early Medieval South India, Orient
Longman, New Delhi, 1993.
; Phases of Urbanization: An Overview / 8S
92. Chattopadhyaya, ‘Political Processes’, 18-19.
93. The most systematic study of the mddu and kurram for the Cola
country is that of Y. Subbarayalu, Political Geography of the Cola
Country, Madras, 1973. This work, however, restricts its study to
the Kaveri valley and adjacent areas in the north and south. This
study also confines itself to the middle Cola period, which in
fact represents the end of the main phase of agrarian expansion
of the Cola region, not the stages of such expansion. The erstwhile
Pallava and Pandya regions need to be taken up for an equally
thorough investigation.
94. Studying the political geography of this region may prove to be
a very useful method of establishing the chronological sequence
of their emergence, which can be done with the help of contem-
porary inscriptions, providing a remarkable corroboration of the
integration of less developed pre-existing settlements, having no
irrigation or other facilities, into the newly emerging brahmadeya
and temple nucleated centres, interesting examples of which may
be found in Tondaimandalam.
The kéttam, of which twenty-four are traditionally assigned to
the Pallava region, had in it one or more mddus, some of which
are for the first time attested to only in early Cola or middle Cola
inscriptions, indicating, thereby, that the process of development
and integration was continuous. The same process is noticeable in
the case of madu and kurram in the Cola and Pandya regions even
upto the eleventh century ap when the valanddu was introduced
as a revenue division under Rajaraja I, after a major land survey
and assessment was initiated by him for revenue assessment. Nearly
fifty nadu/kurram \ocalities have been listed so far in the Pandya
region between seventh and tenth centuries ap. The expansion of
one of these nadus, viz., mulli ndadu in the wet zone of Tamraparni
valley, provides an interesting case of deliberate royal choice of a
region for development as a resource base under the Colas.
95. K.R. Srinivasan, ‘Pallava Architecture’, Ancient India, 1958, no.
14; Soundararajan, Art of South India, Tamil Nadu and Kerala,
Delhi, 1978, 75-105.
96. S. Jaiswal, ‘Caste in the Socio-economic Framework of Early
India’, Presidential Address, Ancient India Section, IHC, 38th Session,
Bhuvaneswar, 1977, 14.
97. It is only in the medieval nigandu or lexicographic works and
commentaries that one comes across references to the Vaisya and
Stidra categories.
98. Jaiswal, ‘Caste in the Socio-economic Framework’, 30.
86 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
99, Ludden, Peasant History in South India, 41.
100. T.N. Subramaniam, Thirty Pallava Copper Plates, Tami] Varalarru
Kalakam, Madras, 1966.
101. Subramaniam, Ten Pandya Copper Plates, Madras, 1967.
102. See Minakshi, Administration and Social Life, part m, chapter x1,
Karashima, South Indian History and Society, chapter 1.
103. Hall believes that agaram as a market centre for each nadu
evolved even in the Pallava times, i.e. before the 10th century
ap. Further, he treats the 400 years of Cola rule as a single
undifferentiated unit, failing to see the spatial and chronological
increase in the number of magarams as an important indication
of the growth of the commercial network. See Trade and Statecraft.
104. The medieval migandu works, refer to the Véldlas as taking up
six professions, such as cultivation, smithy, pottery, weaving,
cattle rearing and trade. See M. Raghava Iyengar, Vélir Varalaru
(Tamil), Madras, 1964, 3rd edn, 27-8. Also R. Nagaswamy,
Yavarum Kélir (Tamil), Madras, 1973, 161.
105. See Kuppuswamy, Economic Conditions, 98.
106. See Chapters 4 and 6 in this volume.
107. The discussion on the merchant guilds is based on A. Appadorai,
Economic Conditions in Southern India (av 1000—av 1500), 2 vols,
Madras, 1936; K. Indrapala, ‘Some Medieval Mercantile Com-
munities of South India and Ceylon’, Journal of Tamil Studies,
Oct. 1970, vol. u, no. 2; K.R. Venkatarama Ayyar, “Medieval
Trade, Craft and Merchant Guilds in South India’, Journal of
Indian History, 1947, 268-80; Meera Abraham, ‘A Medieval
Merchant Guild of South India’, Studies in History, Jan.-June
1982, vol. 1, no. 1, See Chapter 5 in this volume.
108. See Chattopadhyaya, ‘Markets and Merchants in Early Medieval
Rajasthan’, Social Science Probings, Dec. 1985, vol. u, no. 4.
109. K.G. Krishnan, ‘Chittiramélipperiyanadu-An Agricultural
Guild of Medieval Tamil Nadu’, Journal of theM adras University,
Jan. 1982, reprint, vol. tiv, no. 1.
110. Nagaswamy, Studies in Ancient Tamil Law and Society, Madras,
1978. (Pub. by the Institute of Epigraphy, The State Department
of Archaeology, Government of Tamil Nadu), 75-9; Nos 6, 18
and 26 of Annual Report on Indian Epigraphy (ARE), 1953-4.
111, T. Venkateswara Rao, Local Bodies in Pre-Vijayanagar Andhra,
Ph.D. Thesis (unpublished), Dharwar, 1975, 76-8.
112. yim See South Indian Inscriptions (SII), vol. v,
no. 496.
113. Pudukkottai State Inscriptions, no. 1083.
~ Phases of Urbanization: An Overview / 87
114. SHI, vi, 291, 442 and so on.
115. Nagaswamy, Studies in Ancient Tamil Law.
116. Venkateswara Rao, ‘Local Bodies’, chapter wi.
117. 215 of ARE, 1976-7.
118. Some of these centres may be recognized from the names of
places from where the signatories to guild inscriptions hailed.
A careful listing of such place names with their nddu locations
may be helpful in identifying many of them, e.g. S//, vin, no. 442.
119. Vijaya Ramaswamy, Textiles and Weavers in Medieval South India,
OUP, 1985, 58-9.
120.
See Chapter 4 in this volume.
121.
Stein, Peasant State and Society in Medieval South India, OUP,
1980, 241-53.
122. Tirumadaivilagam—Quarters around temple. See T.N. Subraman-
iam, South Indian Temple Inscriptions, Glossary; also ARE 1921-2,
part Il.
123. Gurukkal, ‘The Agrarian System’, chapter m1.
124. Chattopadhyaya, Coims and Currency Systems in South India, c Ab
225-1300, New Delhi, 1976, 137.
125. See Wheatley, The Pivot of the Four Quarters, 281, for such systemic
levels of integration in urbanization.
126. Ibid., 318. The question ‘What is urbanism’ is ‘metaphysical
rather than scientific, not easily answered by the empirical
methods of social sciences’. See Donald Mc Taggart, ‘The Reality
of Urbanism’, Pacific Viewpoint, 1965, vol. 6, no. 2, 220-4.
127. On the question of dominance and power relationships, see
Abrams, ‘Towns and Economic Growth: Some Theories and
Problems’, in Abrams and Wrigley (eds), Towns in Societies: Essays
in Economic History and Historical Sociology, 9-33, where the author
attempts to bring into focus the essence of urban forms and
also, in the process, tries to establish that the question of
dominance and power relationships is the one important thread
that runs through the writings of Max Weber, J. Sjoberg and F.
Braudel.
128. See Chapter 6 in this volume.
129. ‘The Economy of Kaficipuram: A Sacred Centre in Early South
India’, Journal of Urban History, February 1980, 148-9.
130. See Zvelebil, The Smile of Murugan: On The Tamil Literature of
South India, Leiden, 1973, 43ff, for an internal chronology of
early Tamil works. 7
131. See Friedhelm Hardy, Viraha-Bhakti: The Early History of Krsna
88 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Devotion in South India, Delhi, 1983, for an excellent analysis of
the a/var poetry and their emotional bhakti.
13z Champakalakshmi, ‘Religious Conflict in the Tamil Country:
A Re-appraisal of Epigraphic Evidence’, Journal of the Epigraphic
Society of India, 5 (1978).
13x S.R. Balasubrahmaniam, Early Cola Temples, Orient Longman,
1971, Middle Cola Temples, Thomson Press India Ltd, 1975; Later
Cola Temples, Mudgala Trust, 1979.
134. Champakalakshmi, ‘The Sovereignty of the Divine: The Vaisnava
Pantheon and Temporal Power in South India’, in H.V. Sree-
nivasa Murthy, B. Surendra Rao, Veluthat and S.A. Bari (eds),
Essays on Indian History and Culture (Felicitation Volume in
Honour of Professor B. Sheik Ali), New Delhi, 1990, 49-66.
JB i= The description of the city of Tanjavur given here is based on
the Cola inscriptions of Tanjavur, South Indian Inscriptions, parts
eo and 4, voli m
136. The temple employees included treasurers, accountants, watch-
men, musicians, dancers, drummers, carpenters, goldsmiths,
braziers, tailors and so on. Many of them received a house site
and lands for maintenance.
13%; Carter, An Introduction to Urban Historical Geography, London,
1983, 14.
138. In the technique ofo rientation, the emphasis was on the cardinal
compass directions. Indian temples invariably face east.
139. Carter, Urban Historical Geography, 13.
140. The Tiruvisaippa on these two temples is included in the Saiva
Canon.
141. For Kancipuram—Perumpanarmuppatai, \l. 371-3. For Madurai—
Maduraikkanci, \. 429; Murukarruppatai, \. 71 and Panpatal, 20,
25-6. The medieval commentators call the city of Madurai ‘Nan-
madakkidal’, which means ‘the meeting point of the four
quarters (streets)’.
142. See Wheatley, The Pivot of the Four Quarters, 311.
143. See Chapter 4.
144, 651 of ARE, 1916.
145. See Chapters 4 and 7; Taniyar means independent settlement.
146, Carter, Urban Historical Geography, 8.
147, Stein’s view is that the temple enclosures with high walls were
meant to afford physical protection.
148. M.I. Finley, The Ancient Economy, London, 1975 (reprint),
chapter v; idem ‘The Ancient City: From Fustel de Coulanges to
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview / 89
Max Weber and Beyond’, Comparative Studies in Society and
History, 19, 1977.
149. Hall and Spencer, ‘The Economy of Kaficipuram’, 139-40 and
147.
150. See James C. Harle, Temple Gateways in South India: The Architecture
and Iconography of the Chidambaram Gopuras, Oxford, 1963.
151. The orthogenetic and heterogenetic cities have been proposed
as models for studying cities in traditional societies and those
which developed in modern (colonial and industrial) societies.
This is also related to primary urbanization for the city sui generis
and secondary urbanization (diffusion and imposition of urban
forms) and to the values and world views of the ideology of the
Little and Great Traditions and that of the modern west. See
Robert Redfield and Milton Singer, ‘The Cultural Role of Cities’,
Economic Development and Cultural Change, 1954-5, i, 53-73. The
primary and secondary urbanization follows Morton Fried’s
distinction of pristine and secondary states in the discussion of
Paul Wheatley and, hence, evolution of urbanism and the
appearance of the early state institutions are taken to be a
simultaneous development.
The concept of the ceremonial centre is admirably worked
out by Wheatley, The Pivot of the Four Quarters, 311. His study
of the Chinese city of the second millennium sc (i.e. Shang,
north China) is most interesting from the point of view of
‘traditional’ societies. Its applicability to the medieval kingdom
of Southeast Asia is borne out by the symbolism and structure
of the ceremonial centre in the great complex at Angkor in
Cambodia. This is also comparable to the process of Synoecism
in ancient Greece. However, Wheatley’s cross-cultural compari-
sons with Mesopotamia, Meso-America, Yoruba (Nigeria) and
especially the Indus valley, are fraught with great difficulties due
to the methodological difficulties in using the kind of ar-
chaeological data unearthed in these places.
Following Wheatley, Harold Carter uses the concept of the
ceremonial centre to explain the structure of the city in areas of
nuclear urbanism as well as secondary urbanism. His method-
ology, derived as it is from historical geography, is more sound
in so far as the structural design and regional variations are
capable of being established (Carter, Urban Historical Geography,
1983).
a recent study of Madurai and Madras, Susan Lewan-
dowski tries to analyse the form and function of the ceremonial
go / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
city and the colonial port as orthogenetic and heterogenetic
cities respectively. She tries to establish a distinction between
Madurai as representing a unitary urban form and Madras a
tripartite urban form, Madurai representing the traditional ideol-
ogy, the tripartite division of urban Madras being predicated
on a western ideology that allowed for horizontal linkages within
the city. See Susan Lawandowsky, ‘Changing Form and Function
of the Ceremonial and Colonial Port City in India: An Historical
Analysis of Madurai and Madras’, in K.N. Chaudhuri and C).
Dewey (eds), Economy and Society, OUP, 1979, 299-329.
F52 The implications of such a possibility are relevant to the question
whether such towns led to the dissolution of existing social
relations between the merchants and the agricultural elite. Emer-
gence of commercial towns (closed towns) and the non-legitimate
domination of merchants, it has been argued, led to the dissolu-
tion of existing social relations and the decline of feudalism in
Europe. It has also been suggested that the merchant groups
were alien bodies. Both propositions were found to be difficult
to establish and, hence, the question became one of how control
over production and towns of productive capacity became an
important point of conflict between feudal lords and merchants.
See Abrams, ‘Towns and Economic Growth’.
153. Epigraphia Indica, 1935-6, vol. xxi, 383-5.
154. 120 of ARE, 1905.
155; 167 of ARE, 1909.
156. SII, vol. vi, nos 40 and 41.
ion 264 of ARE, 1943-4, 381 of ARE, 1939-40; Inscriptions of the
Pudukkotai State, 1022.
158. These stations have been described as a string of Hoyasala
fortresses from Kundani in the Hoyasala region to Rameévaram
in the south-eastern coast, to Tiruvannammalai in the north and
Mannargudi in the Kaveri delta region, holding the core of the
Tamil country within a triangular military nexus. See K.R.
Venkataraman, The Hoyasalas in the Tamil Country, 47. References
to Padaipparru as a revenue unit meant for the army,
Padatvidu or cantonment, and special levies for the maintenance
of forts, cavalry and elephant corps are also frequent in Pandya
records. S//, vu, 145, xvi, 141 and 145 and so on.
159. Elliot and Dowson, The History of India as Told by its Own
Historians, |, 69-70; see also Nilakanta Sastri, The Pandyan Kingdom,
147; M. Balasubramanyan, ‘Administration and Social Life under
Phases of Urbanization: An Overview / g1
the Later Pandyas’, Ph.D. Thesis (unpublished), Kamaraj Univer-
sity, Madurai, 1985, chapter vin.
160. Vijaya Ramaswamy, Textiles and Weavers, IESHR, 1985, 22, no. 4,
38-40.
161. This may be seen as a step towards ‘proto-industrialization’ a
theory recently advanced for the late medieval and pre-colonial
period in South Asia. Frank Perlin, ‘Proto-Industrialisation and
Pre-colonial South Asia’, Past and Present, 1983, no. 92. Also
Vijaya Ramaswamy, ‘Artisans in Vijayanagar Society’, JESHR,
1985, 22, no. 4; idem “The Genesis and Historical Role of Master
Weavers in South Indian Textile Production’, /ESHO, vol. xxi.
162. For a detailed description of the sacred complex and royal
enclosures at Hampi, see John M. Fritz, George Michell and M.S.
Nagaraja Rao, The Royal Centre at Vijayanagara, Preliminary Report,
University of Melbourne, Vijayanagara Research Centre, Mono-
graph Series, 1984, no. 4, chapters 2, 3 and 5.
163. For a discussion of these chamges as part of the increasing
autonomy of each institutional sphere of society making the
problem of legitimation even more complex, see Wheatley, The
Pivot of the Four Quarters, 320-1.
2
Stimulus from Outside: Urbanization
in the Early Historical Period
c. 300 BC to AD 3500
he second urbanization in India, which began in the sixth
century BC, with its epicentre in the Ganges. valley, became
a subcontinental phenomenon by the beginning of the Christian
era and registered a general decline by the end of the third
century AD. Urban processes were conspicuously intensive be-
tween the third century Bc and the third century AD, 1.e. the
early historical period, when they spread to peninsular India in
the wake of Mauryan political expansion and economic control
over peninsular regions with major resource potential, especially
minerals. However, the degree of urbanization and the nature
of urban forms varied considerably in the Deccan, Andhra
region and Tamilakam, the three main geographical and cultural
regions of peninsular India.
Tamilakam in the early historical period offers an interesting
regional version oft he second urbanization in the subcontinent.
It points to the need for probing into the diversities and regional
variations in the processes and forms of early historical
urbanism. The early urbanism of Tamilakam was not induced
by forces of an inner growth but was a secondary development
due to inter-regional trade, mainly coastal, between the Ganges
valley, Andhra and Tamil regions and also presumably between
the Gujarat and Kerala coasts. More significantly, it was stimu-
lated by maritime commerce between South India and the
Mediterranean west and subsequently between South India and
Southeast Asia, in which Sri Lanka was a major entrepot.
Although maritime trade was the major impulse in the urbaniza-
tion of peninsular India as a whole, important differences exist
in the degree and nature of Mauryan influences over the Deccan
and Andhra on the one hand, and Tamilakam on the other.
Unlike the Satavahana Deccan and Andhra regions, where
j Stimulus from Outside / 93
Mauryan imperial and cultural influences were more direct in
the emergence of state societies in the post-Mauryan period,!
the impact of Mauryan administrative structures was at best
only marginal and less direct over the Tami! tribal polities of
the Céra-Cola-Pandya and the lesser Vélir chiefs. With the
exception of references in the Asokan edicts? to the Céras, Colas,
Pandyas and the Satiyaputras, identified with the Atiyaman
chiefs of Takatir (present Dharmapuri) as friendly border
peoples, there is no evidence of direct interaction. In other
words, political processes and territorial expansion were not
functionally interrelated to urban genesis, which in Tamilakam,
was the result mainly of external stimulus, and hence were not
at the core of the transformation of a non-state society into a
state society. The secondary urbanization of Tamilakam, it
would seem, was not simultaneous with the emergence of a state
society, i.e. state formation.
It may also be pointed out that no religio-political foci for
such a transformation had evolved in early Tamilakam. The
emergence of religio-political foci has been characterized by
S.N. Eisenstadt* as ‘one of the most important breakthroughs
of development from the relatively closed kinship based primi-
tive community’ and its change into stratified ‘class’ oriented
society. Religio-political foci would also assist in the process
of creating ‘effective space’ in the form of a territory controlled
from and oriented to the cult centre. This would also presup-
pose the emergence of a centralizing power or development of
new social institutions cutting across kinship and clan based
organization, for which there is no evidence in early Tamilakam.
It is significant that the impact of the varna ideology in social
stratification is hardly visible in the Tamil region except in
its nascent stage and in a restricted zone, viz the eco-zone of
marutam (plains/river valleys).
The establishment of the early Tamil polities was preceded
by centuries of expansion of what is called the Megalithic
culture, the earliest extant archaeological evidence of a uniform
material culture in South India, the distinguishing traits of
which were the use of iron implements (mainly weapons of war
and a limited number of agricultural implements) and the Black
and Red Ware pottery. The ‘Sangam’ or the early historical
94 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
period would seem to represent the end phases of this culture’
and the emergence of Tamil civilization, which has been at-
tributed to and was simultaneous with urbanization stimulated
by coastal and maritime trade.°
Emerging in the main rice-producing regions of the Kaveri,
Vaigai, Tamraparni and Periyar, the early ruling lineages of the
Colas, Pandyas and Céras controlled vast tracts of agricultural
land in these river valleys. Evidence of irrigation works in these
areas, particularly the Kaveri delta, is provided by the Sangam
works and later traditions,’ although archaeological corrobora-
tion is at the moment non-existent. Socio-political dominance
over early Tamil society was shared by the three major ruling
families called the Mu vendar (usually taken to be ‘three crowned
kings’) and the minor chieftains called the vélir. Strife among
the Mu vendar was a common feature, presumably for control
over one another’s riverine plains as well as other resources and
over the minor chiefs, each of them with their administrative
or political centre. Maritime trade, the crucial and determinant
factor in early urbanization, brought the much needed luxury
items as resources for socio-political dominance and patronage,
and hence it was more important for these rulers to gain control
over the coastal region adjacent to their mainland, through
which they could regulate the trade with distant lands. Equally
important was their attempt to control areas with rich trade
and resource potential belonging to the others. Thus, the pearl-
rich Pandya coast and pepper-rich Céra coast would have been
the major targets of Cola plunder raids.
The Sangam rulers showed a distinct concern with maritime
trade and its control, by actively participating in it as major
consumers of luxury goods, by consciously developing ports of
trade, by levying tolls and customs at the ports and by issuing
coins, if the recent discoveries of local coinage is any indication.
Hence, we see the emergence of dual centres of power, centres
of political and commercial activity in the interior and on the
coast respectively—such as Uraiyur and Kavérippumpattinam
(Puhar) for the Colas, Madurai ard Korkai for the Pandyas and
Karuvur (Vafici) and Muciri for the Céras. That other chieftains
also emulated these ruling families is indicated by the Tiraiyar
of Tondainadu (northern Tamilakam) with Kacci (later
Stimulus from Outside / 95
Kancipuram) and Nirppeyarru (Vasavasamudram) in the Palar
valley and at its mouth and the lesser chiefs Oviyar with Mavi-
lankai (Tindivanam) and Virai (Arikamédu/Virampattinam-
Poduke of Ptolemy) in the contiguous South Arcot district and
Pondicherry.
Thus, urban forms are seen to emerge in certain enclaves,
restricted to two eco-zones (timaz), viz. the marutam (plains) and
the meital (coastal/littoral). Craft production was similarly
confined to areas rich in mineral resources and raw materials
as in the Kongu region, i.e. Coimbatore - Erode (now Periyar)
districts, a semi-arid zone as well as a transit zone, which also
lay significantly in the Céra land and on the route linking the
western coast to the eastern plains and coast, via the Palghat
Pass. Crafts like weaving also seem to have developed in centres
commanding access to raw materials like cotton such as Uraiyar,
Madurai and also Arikamédu.
I
The above brief survey of urbanism in early Tamilakam may
now be elaborated for explaining the regional variations in
urban processes and forms, as also the underlying differences
between the early historical and early medieval urbanization in
Tamilakam.
A useful starting point for the discussion on urbanism would
be to provide a general picture of the socio-economic and
political configurations of early historical Tamilakam.* Society
in early Tamilakam was organized on the basis of kinship ties
(kudi = clan) with clear perceptions of man=environment rela-
tionship, as reflected in the distinctive pattern of economic
activities in different eco-zones called the timai,’ a dominant
theme in Sangam poetry. Five such timais are described in the
Sangam texts. The tinai concept, not a mere poetic convention
in the Sangam works, is the reflection of a physiographical
reality and points to an understanding of human adaptation
to environment and, hence, the most relevant from the his-
torian’s point of view. Interspersed with one another, the
aintinai or five eco-situations were marked by different forms
96 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
of production ranging from primitive subsistence level hunting
and gathering (kurivci tinai = hilly backwoods), pastoralism/
animal husbandry and shifting cultivation (mullai tinai = pas-
toral tract/forest), fishing (neital tinai = coastal/littoral), to
agriculture (marutam = riverine wetland/plains), while plunder-
ing and cattle lifting as an occupation characterized the tran-
sitory zone of palai (parched/arid zone). Blending of tinais also
occurred with mixed forms of subsistence. In effect four major
forms of production can be identified, viz. animal husbandry,
shifting agriculture, petty commodity production and plough
agriculture.'° Forces of change have been recognized only in
the marutam, where plough agriculture appeared in the later
phases and new agrarian units emerged such as brahmana
households/settlements and warrior settlements. In the xeztal,
apart from fishing, salt manufacturing and eventually trade
also became important economic activities. In the brahmana
households of marutam, the cultivating groups in the service
of the brahmanas created new relations of production outside
the kinship framework, on which all contemporary production
activities were based. Such service groups may point to the
beginnings of a new stratification by gradually crystallizing
into castes, although at a later stage. The change from a tribal
to a peasant society would thus become evident in the marutam,
where vast tracts of agricultural land were controlled by the
ruling families, who depended on peasant tribute and who
paid attention to irrigation and wet cultivation towards the
latter part of this period. Although plough agriculture made
its appearance in the marutam zone, it was confined to menpulam
or pockets of cultivable wet rice land in the plains surrounded
by vanpulam or dry land with other kinds of dry crops.
Subsistence agriculture was common to all timais and plough
agriculture had not yet become dominant."
The tinais, though uneven in their socio-economic milieux,
were basically tribal in organization. Kinship was the basis of
production relations in all the ¢izais, with no social division of
labour even in the marutam, where the households increasingly
organized and controlled production. Social differentiation,
which is the nub of the problem of urbanization, did not
develop even in these zones (marutam and neital), beyond a
Stimulus from Outside J 97
broad division into two levels the canror/uyarndor/mélor (the
higher ones) and the slicinar/kilor (the lower ones).'? Despite the
presence of brahmana households there is no evidence of the
impact of the vara ideology, although a late section of the
Tamil grammar Tolkapptyam, i.e. the Porul atikaram' shows that
varma norms were imposed at a later stage as a theoretical
framework on what was basically a non-stratified, clan or kinship
based organization with evidence of ranking only among the
chiefs and ruling lineages.
There is enough evidence to show that specialized craft
production also developed such as metal working, weaving and
salt manufacturing, evidently in response to local exchange as
well as inter-regional and long-distance trade. Such specialists
are known both from literature and the early Tamil Brahmi
inscriptions. They have, however, been viewed as mere func-
tionaries in a complex system of co-operation based on the
network of kinship relations."
A gift (kodat) was the main means of redistribution, which
itself was based on kinship and inter-personal relationship
beyond kinship, e.g. the pulavar or poets receiving gifts from
the chief or patron. The institution of gifts was particularly
important as a source of legitimation for the ruling lineages
and chiefs. Redistribution through gifts was of two kinds, the
one of subsistence level goods and the other of prestigious
goods. Three levels of redistribution may be identified. Redis-
tribution of subsistence goods seems to have taken place at all
the three levels, the wéendar, velir and kilar in a descending
order. The vendar provided subsistence goods on various oc-
casions, at the time of war for their henchmen/fighters and
also to the lowly bards (panar) who sang their praise for their
munificence. The vendar were praised by panar and pulavar,
both for their valour and heroism in war and for their
generosity. At a higher level the véndar also made gifts to the
pulavar, such gifts consisting of prestigious items like gold
coins and (gold) lotuses, gems and muslin and even horses
and elephants. While subsistence goods thus got redistributed
at all the three levels, the gift of luxury items became the
prestigious form of exchange with an ‘ideo-technic’ or ‘socio-
technic’ value,'® but only at the higher levels of vendar and
98 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
vélir. Plundered resources got redistributed while luxury ttems
of trade entered the gift exchange.
Thus, more than agriculture, the Cera-Cola-Pandya ruling
families depended, for socio-political hegemony, on maritime
trade which the coastal regions (wertal) adjacent to their mainland
carried on with distant lands. Socio-political dominance was
shared by these three ruling families (Ma vendar) and the minor
chieftains called velir. Strife among the vendar was a common
feature for control over each other’s riverine tracts and other
rich resources like pearls and pepper. Strife as well as matri-
monial alliance were common between the vendar and vélir for
hegemony and control over resources of the hilly, forest and
other zones. Tribal warfare, endemic to such early societies, is
also corroborated by the evidence of archaeology, which shows
a predominance of war weapons among the Megalithic burials.
More important, however, is the evidence of the ideology of
war and heroism that dominates the Sangam poetry, especially
the puram collections (war poems).
The absence of a regular system of tax or tribute is underlmed
by the idealization of war/plunder and different situations
(turat) of raids,'* the glorification of the warrior, the hero and
death in battle, the sharing of the great meal by the ruler/chief
with his warriors and the reward in the form of land to the
warrior, who preferred wet rice cultivating settlement (#7) to dry
zones for such gifts.'? Hence, the lack of evidence on institu-
tional mechanisms for appropriating surplus'® by the rulers
characteristic of a developed state system, points to the tribal
character of these chiefdoms, which otherwise had the potential
of developing into kingdoms or incipient states. They were more
akin to the sixth century BC janapada polities of the Ganges
valley,’ with the senior lineages as ruling families with impres-
sive genealogical claims.
It has been pointed out earlier that the impact of Mauryan
imperial structures was marginal in Tamilakam in contrast to
the Deccan and Andhra under the Satavahanas. Under such
impact the power structure that evolved in the Deccan was
derived from Mauryan ideological influences. This has been seen
as a ‘secondary state formation’’ which stands in contrast to
the absence of such structures in Tamilakam. It must also be
Stimulus from Outside | 99
noted that the Satavahanas adopted the brahmanical ideology
as a source of legitimation of their rule, committed as they
were with their priestly affiliations, to the vamdsrama ideal.
The performance of the Vedic sacrifice and the protection of
the varnasramadharma are significant claims made by them in
their inscriptional records.” No such claims to be protectors
of the varna ideal are made by the early Tamil lineage polities.
Although the performance of Vedic sacrifices, especially the
rajasuya, by the Colas and other major ruling families, i.e. the
Cera and Pandya, is attested to in the anthologies,” yaya or
sacrifice was not intrinsic to their legitimation process. Another
point of difference is in the nature of patronage extended by
the Satavahanas to Buddhism, the dominant ideology of the
early historical period, which brought about a symbiotic rela-
tionship among the political structure, the commercial groups
and the Buddhist order.”
Royal patronage, and more importantly the patronage of a
whole community of Buddhist lay followers, representing the
trading and artisanal groups, craftsmen as well as economically
poorer sections of society, contributed to the building up of
institutions like the monastery and the guild in the Deccan and
Andhra, with enormous resources. As a result stupa and vihara
complexes of huge dimensions, both in the structural and
rock-cut styles, came into existence marking the foci urban
growth and routes of communication and trade. On the con-
trary, such networks, which are crucial in establishing links
between trade and craft production and a market system, were
less developed in Tamilakam, and hence the absence of large-
scale patronage to Buddhist institutions like monasteries with
the impressive architectural output of the Deccan and Andhra
type, and the absence of different sectarian groups of Hinayana
and Mahayana Buddhism, which are so prominently visible in
the Deccan and Andhra inscriptions.”
Institutional forces like the Buddhist monastery, with their
impressive monuments and cohesive guild organizations as foc!
of urban development are not attested to in the archaeological
and epigraphic records of early Tamilakam, thus marking a
major point ofdi fference in the nature and forms of urbanism.
The only notable Buddhist structures (of brick) have been
100 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
unearthed in the port town of Kavérippumpattinam, and these
are dated to the fourth and fifth centuries AD,” while the earlier
period has no significant architectural remains.
The references to Buddhism in the earlier poems of the
Sangam anthologies indicate that Buddhism and Jainism were
among the many religious faiths which had a following in the
politico-commercial centres like Puhar, Vafici and Madurai. It
is only in the post-Sangam epics Silappadikaram and Mani-
meékalai that Buddhism and Jainism appear as influential ideolo-
gies among the merchant community and craftsmen. Royal
patronage to these two Sramanic religions is recorded in the
brief donative Tamil Brahmi inscriptions” occurring on the
trade route linking the Tamil region with southern Karnataka
and with the west coast. These donations hardly reached the
level of the stupendous projects of the Deccan and the Andhra
regions. They are at best vassa or rainy retreats for the wandering
Buddhist and Jain mendicants in the form of natural caverns
on hills,” made suitable for the monks through provision for
stone beds and drip ledges to carry rain water away from the
caverns. These caverns with stone beds and Tamil Brahmi in-
scriptions occur in the hills around the Pandya capital Madurai,
around the Cera capital Karur and near the Cola centre of
Uratyur, but more significantly, they are found on the trade
routes, with a concentration in transit zones like the Puduk-
kottai district and Erode (Periyar) district. Here, apart from
royal donors of the Pandya and Céra families, the Colas do
not figure in any of the donative records.”* Again, the individual
donors belong to the trading and artisan communities. No
guild organization with the exception of a single reference to
a nigama, 1s known from these records. In comparison, the
Brahmi inscriptions of the Deccan and Andhra Buddhist
centres, record a number of guilds, traders and craftsmen, apart
from whole village communities as donors.” Most important
is the absence of any direct reference in the Tamil inscriptions
to householders comparable to the northern gahapatis as donors
to any of the Buddhist and Jain teachers. The gahapati, who
is the most frequently mentioned donor in the Deccan and
Andhra and even central Indian Buddhist centres, represents
the most important social category, which emerged as an
Stimulus from Outside / 101
influential landowning (householder) and trading group in the
context of early historical Buddhist centres and urban growth.”
In the Tamil context, the kildn (kilar = plural) would seem
to be the landowning householder, the equivalence of the
gahapati, who emerges as the third level in the patron-lient
gift-exchange system of redistribution. The &:lan’s position in
this redistribution system was mainly that of a village chief/elder
and a landed householder but he is hardly visible in the donative
records of the Buddhist and Jain centres, unless it is claimed
that some of the names in the Tami! Brahmi inscriptions ending
with the suffix antai*' refer to such householders.
The evidence thus points to a situation of multiplicity of
religious influences in which neither the Brahmanic nor the
Sramanic religion had gained dominance over the others. Again
the concept of tia: provides the clue to the nature of Tamil
religion, which, in the early historical period was ‘anthropo-
centric’ with a predominant folk component, intensively sensual
and humanistic.” This is evident from the descriptions of the
deities of the different tsmais (eco-zones) who are invoked for
success in love and war. The tribal basis of these deities is
reflected in their verbal imagery and their close association with
the ecological/environmental background. Thus, Ceyon/Murvu-
kan was the god of love and war of the kurivci tribes (hunters),
Mayon, the pastoral deity of mullai, Korravai, the war goddess
of the hunters and robbers of palai, Vendan, the agricultural
deity of the arutam and Varunan, the sea god of the neital.*?
None of them had any claims to universality. No formal
religious system with an institutional focus is attested to either
in literature or in archaeological record.
The spread of Buddhism and Jainism coincided with the
increase in trade and commercial activity and introduced an
element of heterogeneity in the urban centres. Buddhism
registers a significant presence in the coastal towns, while
Jainism is cqnfined to the inland centres, both in the political
and commercial centres and on trade routes. The heterogeneity
of the urban population in the inland and coastal centres
shows, however, that people of different ethnic origins, different
occupational background and belonging to various religions
aggregated in towns, where brahmanical and folk cults were
102 ff Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
equally well represented. There is no evidence of a single
dominant religion in any of them. Formal religious systems
and dominant traditions developed only in the post-Sangam
(i.e. post-third century AD) period, when the concept of bhakti:
and the temple emerged as the innovative focus of socio-cultural
organization, transforming a basically tribal folk religion into
a formal, universalized brahmanical religious system by the
sixth century AD.*4
III
DIFFERENT LEVELS OF EXCHANGE
In a society, wherein reciprocity and redistribution were deter-
mined by kinship and inter-personal relations, it would be hard
to find evidence of a market system, which was linked directly
to land, labour and the production base. Regular local exchange
in such a society was mainly based on barter, both in day-to-day
transactions and in inter-timai exchange, i.e. mutual exchange of
resources available in the respective ¢zzazs, or a straight exchange
of goods of different tiais—called notuttal*°—hill products like
wood, honey, bamboo-rice, etc. in exchange for the marutam
paddy or mullai dairy products and the salt of metal for the
paddy of marutam. The centres at which they were exchanged
could well have become nodal points on trade routes in the
process of the expansion of trading networks.
Another informal exchange is indicated by the term kun
etirppai,’® a loan of goods to be paid back (later) in the same
kind and quantity. These local exchanges did not involve the
concept of profit, as they were governed by the use value of
goods. The profit idea does not seem to have operated even in
the exchange of craftgoods by specialists at the local exchange
centres, where the specialist craftsman was ofteny himself the
seller.°’
The different levels of exchange thus show a barter or person
to person exchange of goods of daily consumption like honey,
fish, meat, toddy etc. Paddy and salt entered the larger exchange
network, while pepper and other spices, pearls, precious stones
Stimulus from Outside / 103
(beryl, gems, etc.) aromatic woods and cotton textiles may have
been produced for the overseas exchange markets. While most
items traded in were raw materials, goods like textiles, gems and
jewels were among the few manufactured products meant for
trade. Such commodities were encountered only in a few market
centres, which had inter-regional commercial contacts such as
Puhar, Madurai and Vani. Vast kurinc: and mullai tracts and
even parts of marutam would not have been drawn into such
exchange systems.
It is this kind of picture that is depicted in the Sangam texts,
with which the correlation of archaeological and numismatic
evidence becomes difficult and often questionable. Thus, in the
context of the numerous Roman coin finds (gold and silver),
mainly in hoards, it has been argued that in a redistributive
society of prestation and gifts, where no idea of price or profit
prevailed, coins would have seldom functioned as money but
only as a category of valuables.** A second related problem is
whether the forms of internal exchange, which indicate a fairly
regular economic interaction within Tamilakam, and those of
external exchange (with other countries) represent two distinct
levels of exchange, or whether there were inter-relationships
between them influenced by the expanding trade.
It has been said earlier that the maritime trade of this period
had restricted impact in certain zones leading to urbanism and
the emergence of trading stations/ports on the coast, which were
centres of exchange in long-distance trade, and of consumption
points in the inland centres. It is only at such centres that
regular buying and selling of goods took place. There were
angadis (markets) and dvanams (stores?) in places like Puhar,
Madurai and Vafnici (Karur), which became major commercial
centres due to the expansion of trade on the eastern coast of
Tamilakam. Significantly, the later works of the Pattupattu col-
lection and the epics Silappadikaram and Maniméekalai give more
detailed descriptions of these centres and their commercial
activities.
Two kinds of markets—the nalangadi or the day market, and
the allangadi® or the evening market—are known, and in Puhar
these markets were active in the area between the Maruvur-
pakkam (coastal area) and the Pattinappakkam (residential area).
104 / Tradc, Ideology and Urbanization
The volume of trade 1s indicated by the references to ‘the
valuable merchandise stored in million bundles’, ie. large
quantity, and the items were often rare and prestigious goods
sought by the urban elite and rulers.” Similar descriptions of
the market place at Madurai are also found in the Madu-
raikkanc.”
The market in Puhar was well guarded by the officers of the
Célas and the customs men.® Puhar, being the foremost among
the ‘emporia’ on the east coast, the Colas would have derived
both political and economic advantage by controlling and
promoting this port. The merchants of Puhar, we are told, set
a fair price on all goods, probably depending on ‘supply and
demand’ for such goods and did not try to get too much in
selling their goods nor gave too little when they bought. It is
not easy to determine the degree to which the ‘market principle’,
guided these transactions.
There appears to have been in general no market principle
which determined the acquisition of subsistence goods or al-
location of land and labour resources. Hence, how are these
market centres to be characterized? Could they have acted as
‘peripheral’ markets?* If, as pointed out above, intra-regional
and local exchange was ‘subsistence oriented’* and if it was not
price but equivalence that determined the exchange of goods,
i.e. “substitutable goods in prescribed proportions’,” then the
internal and external forms of exchange must be treated as
representing two different levels. Again, it would also mean that
maritime trade, as the crucial factor in the urbanism of this
period, could well have been a ‘mystically sudden impulse’ to
change, 1.e. ‘urban revolution’.“* In other words, a market system
and a definable power structure, two factors which could cause
an inner growth of urbanism percolating down to the produc-
tion base, were absent in early historical Tamilakam.
It has been pointed out that ‘peripheral markets’ are eco-
nomically important to those engaged in export and import.
To foreign traders such markets are not peripheral, however
much they may be for the locals.” Hence, a more permanent
presence of the yavanas (a settlement) in such market centres is
acknowledged by the texts.°° Foreigners would have been both
buyers and sellers while the local traders (mainly the paratavar),
Stimulus from Outside / 105
purchased merchandise in these markets and carried them for
sale to Ilam (Sri Lanka), Southeast Asia and other distant lands.>!
Here, the market principle may have operated in a limited
context. Urban elite was another category of buyers of luxury
articles, while at the same time they would have been able to
obtain items of daily consumption such as corn, grain, cloth,
flowers toddy, scents etc. in these market places. The staple
produce of the hinterland, with the exception of paddy and
salt, did not find their way to the larger exchange market.
The ports and towns that emerged as a result of this expanding
commerce, may be classified under different heads as the Graeco-
Roman accounts seem to have done. In the Periplus Mans Erythrae
(of the Erythraen Sea) of the first century AD, centres like Naura
(Cannanore? Mangalore?) Tyndis (Tondi, on the west coast)
Nelcynda (Kottayam), Bacare (Porakad) all on the west coast,
Camara (Puhar), Poduce (Arikamédu) and Sopatma (Marak-
kanam), all on the east coast, have been categorised as ‘marts’
or market towns’.*” Subsequently, Ptolemy in his Geographia of
the second century AD introduced a hierarchy by elevating six
of these centres to the status of ‘emporia’*’—Muziris (Muciri—
west coast), Kolkhoi (Korkai), Khaberis (Puhar), Sabouras (Cud-
dalore?), Podouke (Arikamédu) and Melange (Mahabalipuram?)
all on the east coast. Elangkon(?), Manarpha (is it Mailarpha =
Mayilappir in Madras?) and Salour (Saliyur near Alagankulam)
were categorised as marts. The inland centres are generally
referred to as cities/towns.
The Pattinappalai would seem to support the description of
Puhar’s status as an emporium, which had its own quay, har-
bour, warehouses and accommodation for foreign merchants.
With the Colas officially approving and promoting it as an
archoring point, (port), Puhar developed as a place ‘where
business between people of different nationality may be trans-
acted lawfully, where lawful dues and taxes may be imposed
where possibly foreigners reside... ’.”
The textual references are not as direct as one would wish,
because the Sangam heroic poetry uses more often a symbolic
language which needs to be decoded through semiotics. How-
ever, the terms used in the Sangam texts to designate the
merchants and the nature of their organization, also indicate
106 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
the prevalence of two distinct levels of exchange, the day-to-day
barter, hawking and peddling on the one hand and the larger
transactions by specialized merchants dealing in high value
goods for the inter-regional and maritime trade. These terms
are vilainar (seller), pakarnar (hawker) as also the vambalar
(itinerant newcomer? wayfarer?) the vanzkar (trader), paratavar
(fishermen turned traders) and even the uwmanar (salt mer-
chants). The seller and hawkers were also present in cities
like Madurai where they sold ‘the produce of the hills, the
plains and sea’ and even items like ‘gems, pearls and gold’.”°
The diversification of commerce is reflected in the nature of
specialist traders in the markets of Puhar and Madurai, some
of whom dealt in high value commodities apart from daily
consumption goods. Thus, in the markets of Puhar and
Madurai, there were puavinar (flower sellers), kodazyar (garland
sellers), cunnattar (aromatic powder sellers), nidu kadt ilatyinar
(betel leaf/arecanut sellers), kodu-cudu-nurrinar (shell lime shell
bangle), kadainar (shop keepers), manikkuyinar (gem or jewel
makers), kalingam pakarnar (kalingam=cloth sellers), vambu-nirat-
mudinar (fine garment sellers), kal-xodai=attiyar (toddy(?) or
wine(?) sellers), the kavica-karar (bronze sellers), cempu-ceyikunar
(copper article sellers) and skilled workers of all sorts.°’ In
most cases, the manufacturers or producers of such items were
also the sellers.
Occasional caravans (cattu) of itinerant traders such as
umanar and vambalar, carrying goods to the interior (hinter-
land?), such as paddy, salt and sometimes pepper, are also
known. The wmanaccattu (caravan of salt traders) moving their
salt to the interior through difficult and inhospitable tracts on
their bullock carts is often described in the Sangam texts.
Umanar and others moved with their spare bulls, swords, bows
and spears for protection as well as rare and useful things
obtained from hills and seas.*?
The paratavar were the most distinctive of such merchants.
They were inhabitants of the mertal tract, involved in such
activities as fishing, manufacturing salt and making toddy.®
From the later poems of the Pattuppattu, it is evident that they
had become involved in long-distance trade by diversifying from
their traditional fishing to diving for pearls and organizing trade
Stimulus from Outside / 107
in pearls, chank (conch) bangles, tamarind, fish, gem and horses,
which were taken by ‘captains of fine ocean vessels’ (peru-nir-
Occunar) to distant countries.*' At Nirppeyar, the paratavar lived
in high storeyed buildings on sandy roads, occupying many
streets in the port where ‘milk white maned horses arrive with
riches from the north, in ships standing out in the cool ocean
by the sea front’.
The more prosperous among the traders and merchants who
moved on highways or major trade routes, made donations of
caves and beds to Jain and Buddhist monks. These donations,
it must be noted, do not match the ostentatiousness of the con-
temporary western Deccan and Andhra donations.® The early
Tamil Brahmi inscriptions, recording these donations, indeed
mark the trade routes, and in many significant ways confirm
the literary references to specialist traders, e.g. uppu vanikan (salt
merchant), panita vanikan (toddy seller), kolu-wanikan (iron-
monger), aruvai-vanikan (cloth merchant), pon-vanikan (gold
merchant), mantywvannakkan (lapidary)™ as donors, apart from
the Céra and Pandya ruling families. Interestingly, some of the
poets of the Sangam texts belonged to the merchant community
and often carried as a prefix to their names, the names of some
major commercial centres to which they belonged and the nature
of their trade. Some instances are—Madurai Aruvai Vanikan
Ilavettanar (Ilavettanar, the cloth merchant of Madurai), Madu-
rai Kala Vanikan Sittalai Sattanar (grain merchant), Madurai
Olaikkadaiyattar Nalvellaiyar (palm leaf/jewellery merchant),
Uraiyur Ilampon Vanikanar (gold merchant of Uratyur) Kaveri-
ppumpattinattu Ponvanikanar Makanar Nappudanar (Nap-
pudanar, son of a gold merchant of Kavérippumpattinam).”
Both literature and epigraphs thus refer to the trader and
the nature of his trade. In contemporary Deccan the merchants
rarely mention the nature of merchandise they specialised in.
Leading Tamil merchants engaged in import-export activities
were among the wealthier sections of the urban community.
In the later poems of the Sangam collection they are depicted
as living in ‘fine mansions’ and as sporting silk raiments and
gold jewellery. The later epics Silappadikaram and Mani-
mékalai refer to their affluent life styles. Trade is glorified as
one of the two ‘esteemed pursuits’, the other being agriculture.
108 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
The ethical code that the merchants set for themselves is praised
in the Pattinappala.”
The early Tamil chiefdoms seem to have been directly in-
volved in this commercial exchange, often as the most important
consumers of the goods, and as active participants, by making
the native goods available for exchange and also, perhaps, by
issuing their own coins. It has been argued that in many early
societies, the merchant class emerged from among chiefly fam-
ilies, since the redistributional mechanism which operated in
most chiefdoms, concentrated economic wealth in the hands of
those close to the chief.”
Merchants from distant countries settled down in some of
these commercial centres. The yavanas, it is suggested, had to
stay in the Tamil ports for at least a couple of months, due to
the pattern of monsoon winds for sailing.” Separate quarters of
yavanas are known in places like Puhar,’”’ while Arikamédu has
been categorised as a Roman trading station. These quarters were,
however, not ‘autonomous concessions’ or ‘colonies’ similar to
latter-day European factories.” Similarly, the role of these yavana
merchants in contemporary trading activities has also been
considerably over rated. Filliozat and Maloney” would suggest
that the Greek traders’ activities were generally confined to the
major commercial centres, while in the hinterland, the manage-
ment of production of various commodities and their transpor-
tation would have been in the hands of the Tamils. Pliny’s
statement’* that pepper was brought for the foreign traders to
the port of Bacare in local boats and then loaded on to Greek
vessels, and the Vienna papyrus” recording an agreement between
a Tamil merchant and an Alexandrian Greek (?), regarding a
large cargo of goods to be sent to Alexandria, would show that
Tamils traded on equal footing (terms) with foreign traders.
It also needs to be stressed that no yavana is seen making
donations to local religious institutions, whereas a single refer-
ence to a person from Ilam (Sri Lanka), probably a merchant,
donating a cave to Jain monks, is made in a Tamil Brahmi
inscription.”® The Sri Lanka-Tamil interaction is much more
explicitly illustrated by a number of such donative records in
Sri Lanka where Tamil merchants and people of the vélir clan
are mentioned in the context of gifts to Buddhists.
Stimulus from Outside / 109
The yavanas of western Deccan bore sanskritized names and
were often assigned a lower rank in the varmayati hierarchy in
the process of their indigenization in this region.” Donations
of the Indo-Greeks, Sakas etc. were made to local religious estab-
lishments as a part of the process of this indigenization and
acceptance in the local society. Thus, it may be seen that Indian
perceptions of yavanas varied in different regions and among
different Indian communities. While the attitude of the brab-
manas of north India was one of hostility, the Buddhists had a
greater curiosity towards yavana countries (proselytising missions
of Asoka) and also must have shown a more congenial and
friendly attitude to them as traders and patrons of Buddhism.”
The Sangam texts represent a somewhat ambivalent attitude
to the yavanas, for while they have very interesting accounts of
the beautiful yavana ships bringing cool fragrant wine for the
chiefs and elite of Tamil society, there are also expressions of
their distancing themselves from the yavanas who were aliens,
barbarous and spoke a harsh tongue. A hostile tone is used in
the account of a Céra chief who captured the barbarous yavanas
and divested them of their wine and wealth.” They are even
called mulecca. The epics repeat this tone of hostility but at the
same time refer to yavanas employed as city guards and palace
guards. The presence of yavana craftsmen (carpenters) 1n cities
is also attested in the epics.*® The Kodumanal jewel finds as well
as the Amaravati river bed finds,*! in which Graeco-Roman
motifs are identified, would also indicate their presence in the
craft centre. It has been suggested on the basis of Jewish and
Christian legends that Roman craftsmen were shipped to India.”
A temple of Augustus which is believed to have had two cohorts
of Roman soldiers stationed with it, is said to have been located
in Muziris.*2 However, there is no conclusive evidence for the
identification of the Augustus temple.
Numismatic evidence from Tamilakam would also seem to
support the conclusion that two levels of exchange were pre-
valent, one, at the large-scale exchange of goods for goods and
goods for coins (money?) at the big emporia of trade, and the
other, at the purely local subsistence level exchange. The dis-
tribution of punch-marked and Roman coins™ shows an inter-
esting pattern. They are found along the trade routes, mostly
110 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
in hoards. They occur in negligible quantity in stratified levels,
both in the context of trade centres and in the Megalithic
context. Hence, it would appear that coins were used in large
transactions, i.e. in long-distance commerce, both overland and
maritime.
The circulation of Roman coins and their use as money in
South India have been the subject of an inconclusive debate,
due to the complexity of the evidence.” Yet, it has been
suggested that their occurrence in a stratified context, however
negligible, would indicate a limited circulation, possibly along
the routes of trade and rivers of transport. Use of Roman
coins as jewellery, mainly confined to the Tamil region, would
also suggest a lesser role for Roman coins as exchange media,
except in large transactions.
It has also been argued that there need not be a single
explanation for the occurrence of Roman coins mainly in hoards
and that these coins may have had more than a single function.
A coinciding of various factors may have led to the need to
hoard, not necessarily as bullion, for gold was available in India,
the Kolar gold fields showing evidence of working from
Mauryan times to the early centuries AD. Thus, the coins ap-
pearing in hoards could have been protection money to ensure
safe passage of goods from one coast to the other, or investments
in further trade by visiting traders. Considering the large quan-
tities of merchandise that were traded in, the occurrence of such
a large number of Roman coin finds need not be surprising as
‘payment for this trade would have required a large monetary
outlay’.** They were probably required as deposits or sureties.
Such a function is supported by the occurrence of countermarks
(as identifying marks of the depositor?) on some of the coin
finds in hoards, deposited with traders or guilds, particularly
the silver denarii, which show the majority of countermarks and
are confined to Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh. Yet another
function of the Roman coins was as an item of gift in the gift
exchange system followed by the Tamil chiefs and ruling families
and as symbols of status. The Tamil classics have references to
gifts of gold to poets (pulavar),’ who were patronized by the
rulers. This was one form of redistribution, in which prestige
items such as horses, elephants and gold figured.
Stimulus from Outside J 111
The distribution and chronology of the occurrence of the
Roman coins also show a distinct pattern in South India. The
earliest Roman coins, i.e. the Republican issues of the first
century BC reported from south India are confined to the Kerala
region and sites near the Palghat gap (pass), the first region to
be visited by the early Mediterranean traders. Roman coins of
the pre-Christian era are unknown not only in coastal Tamil
Nadu but also in Andhra Pradesh. In the early centuries of the
Christian era, they appear in coastal Tamil Nadu and Andhra.
An intensification of the trading activities on the east coast
seems to have taken place by the first and second century aD,
when the circumnavigation of the cape had become common.
Byzantine coins of the fourth and fifth centuries AD are also
mostly confined to coastal Tamil Nadu, Madurai, Karar and
Sri Lanka, pointing to a shift in the regions of intensive trade.
The distribution of the Roman Rouletted Ware suggests a
more widespread pattern, though in fewer sites, and points to
the rouletting technique travelling from the coast up the rivers
to the interior sites on trade routes. The amphora, an expensive
item, is found only in selected sites, urban in character, with a
prosperous ‘elite’ clientele, i.e. consumers of wine, foodstuffs,
olive oil preserved in such jars.** Vasavasamudram and Kajfici-
puram are two such sites. In the latter, however, the identi-
fication of the conical jars as amphorae is questionable.
The Kodumanal excavations®’ would also confirm the trading
pattern and routes, particularly the overland route from the
western to the eastern coast in the early phases and a continuous
trading activity in the later phases between the Cera land
(Kartr-Kodumanal) and the east coast. The Kongu region (Cera
land), with its beryls and other semi-precious stones, was a rich
resource area and included important iron ore sites.
Evidence of ‘dynastic’ coinage of the Colas, Ceras and
Pandyas is now increasingly available, although not in a stratified
context, with the exception of a few Cola coins (copper) in the
Kavérippumpattinam excavations.” They are known from
private collections and as surface and stray finds. The most
significant is the discovery, in the Amaravati river bed near
Karur, of silver coins with the ‘portrait’ (bust) of a Céra king
and the legend Makkotai.”' Coins with the legend “Kuttuvan
112 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
K6tai’” and ‘Kollippurai’? along with the Céra symbols of the
bow and arrow (and with the double fish and tiger), assignable
to the Céras, have also been found. The ‘portrait’ coins, it 1s
claimed, were influenced by the Roman coins, of which a major
concentration of hoards is found in the land of the Ceras
(Coimbatore region), which was also a transit zone for traders.
Coins with the legend ‘Valuti’ have been assigned to the
Pandyas.” If these discoveries are any indication, the Sangam
rulers, apart from controlling long-distance trade by levying tolls
and customs, could also have been direct participants in the
trade. Even some lesser chiefs like the Malatyamans and Nannan,
(a hill chief mentioned in the Malaipatukatam or Centan ?) seem
to have issued coins, of which one important hoard was found
in Andippatti (Cengam) in the North Arcot district.”
The Sangam poems refer to kasu, pon and kanam, terms, which
are used in the early medieval epigraphic records to denote
currency units. They have been presumed to be gold coins.”
However, there is no indication oft heir metal content or weight,
especially in the Sangam texts. No indigenous gold coin has
been discovered so far. Kanam and kasu were often conferred
as gifts by patron-rulers on poets and there is some indication
that some at least (kanam and pon) were gold coins.
Furthermore, the relationship between the local issues, re-
cently discovered, and the Roman coins is not easy to determine,
just as the role of the silver punch-marked coins,” found in
fairly large numbers, z5-d-vis other coins, is difficult to assess.
It 1s, however, contended” that the punch-marked coins were
used as currency, as quite a few of them have been found in
worn-out condition and in stratified levels. This is attributed to
the general spread and function of punch-marked coins practi-
cally all over the subcontinent. Local issues would also include
some punch-marked coin varieties and resemble the janapada
coins of the Ganges valley. The Bodinaikkanur hoard (near
Madurai) represents one such issue, marked out by the double
carp (fish) symbol of the Pandyas on the reverse with the usual
punch marks on the obverse. Under Ganges valley influence, it
is suggested, die-struck coins were also issued.? The Periplus'™
indicates that while at Barygaza the (Roman) specie imported
into the port was exchanged partially for ‘native currency’ (of
Stimulus from Outside / 113
the Saka, Kusana and Andhra?), no such reference is made in
the context of the Tamil country. This is explained as due to
the absence of indigenous coins,'® an explanation which is no
longer valid as local issues have been found in considerable
numbers.
IV
INTER-REGIONAL TRADE
SHIFTING PATTERNS
Tamilakam was one of several regions in South Asia which
traded with Rome. The pattern of trade in each region seems
to have varied according to the nature of exchange and local
circuits of trade that existed in the period before the Roman
trade. The early historical trading patterns within Tamilakam
and between Tamilakam and other regions of South Asia show
a gradual expansion from the proto-historic Megalithic circuits’
to the regular exchange networks of the early historical period.
While the stages through which the networks emerged are not
directly and fully visible in the archaeological contexts, the
correlation of the early textual data, epigraphic evidence and
numismatic record with the Greek sources enhances our under-
standing of this trading pattern.
Roman trade with South Asia was spread over a long period
and covered the regions from Gujarat down to the Tamil coast
and up to the Andhra region and the Bengal coast. Initially, it
concentrated on the western coast of early Tamilakam and the
ports of this coast (later Kerala) seem to have been active in the
second and first centuries Bc, the ‘discovery’ of the monsoon
winds by Hippalus, often figuring as an important factor in
enabling direct sailing from the Red Sea coast to the western
coast of South India. From here the trade passed overland
* Although this phase is not the main focus of this essay, a study of the
grave goods and pottery of the Megalithic sites in peninsular India reveals
the existence of exchange circuits within the three main culture zones—Deccan,
Andhra and Tamilakam, which increasingly come into focus in the early
historical period.
114 / Trade, Tdeology and Urbanization
through the Palghat gap, the mineral-rich Coimbatore region
to the eastern plains and coast. Subsequently, the circumnaviga-
tion of the peninsula intensified the trade with the east coast
in the first and second centuries AD.
In the early phases, a local circuit of trade appears to have
existed between South India and Sri Lanka linking the Megalithic
peoples of Tamilakam and Sri Lanka.’ Almost simultaneously,
coastal sea traffic linked the Bengal coast (from Tamralipti) with
Sri Lanka, possibly with a looping coastal trade via the Orissan,
Andhra and Tamil coasts. Sri Lanka could well have been an
early terminal point for this trade from the Mauryan times with
contacts resulting in a regular traffic on the east coast.
Early contacts between Tamilakam and Sri Lanka are attested
by the Megalithic cultural remains of both the regions. Apart
from the use of common graffiti (symbols) on the Megalithic
pottery and seals,’ the occurrence of Tamil vélir names in the
third and second century Bc Brahmi inscriptions of northern
Sri Lanka as important personages and references to Tamil
merchants in Sri Lanka’™ are significant pointers to this contact.
Merchants from Sri Lanka are also known in early Tamilakam.'™
The presence of Simhala merchants as well as monks and nuns
is recorded in the inscriptions also of the Buddhist sites in
Andhra, in addition to which the use of Simhalese forms of
Brahmi in the potsherds of the Tamil sites like Arikamédu,!®
attests to their movement via the Tamil coast.
With Mauryan expansion and the opening up oft rade routes
in peninsular India, these contacts became part of a regular
exchange, as indicated by some oft he earliest Buddhist structures
in Sri Lanka, the epigraphic records, sculptures and structural
remains of Andhra region and Tamil coast. The effect of this
early coastal sea traffic is assigned a major role in the emergence
of Tamil civilization and urbanism, with a particular emphasis
on the part played by the Sri Lankan contact.!©”
It 1s into this early circuit that the western (Roman) trade
entered directly in the first and second centuries AD, made
possible by the circumnavigation oft he cape. Earlier the western
coast provided the entry point and outlet for the western trade
with Muziris (Muciri) as the major port of call. The goods
passed from and to the west coast overland through the Kongu
Stimulus from Outside / 115
highway, i.e. the Coimbatore region and Palghat gap. The
distribution pattern of Roman coins'® of the early first cen-
tury BC (Republican coins) on the west coast and the first to
second century AD coins (Augustus, Tiberius, Nero) more pre-
dominantly on the Tamil and Andhra coasts, while coins of the
third-fourth centuries AD occur mainly in Tamil Nadu and Sri
Lanka would provide evidence of this shift, although any con-
clusion based merely on the chronology of the Roman coins
may be questioned. However, there are other significant pointers
to the shifting regional pattern. Thus, while the Persplus of the
first century AD is familiar with the western ports, Ptolemy
(second century AD) has more direct knowledge of the eastern
coast, 1.e. the Tamil and Andhra coasts upto Masalia (Machlipat-
nam region).'”
South India (i.e. Tamilakam) seems to have been drawn into
another circuit, almost simultaneously with the western trade,
with the regions across the Bay of Bengal, i.e. Malaya, Southeast
Asia and as far as China, through an exchange network which
had emerged within the islands of Southeast Asia and China.
This latter circuit became more visible in the centuries after the
beginning of the Christian era, although it could well have
started even by the second century sc.'!? In this circuit, the
contacts between Tamilakam and Southeast Asia seem to have
intensified in the early centuries and continued to be significant
down to the fourth-fifth centuries ap. The early medieval trade
contacts of the Pallava-Cola periods were undoubtedly a con-
tinuation of these contacts, although in a different historical
situation.
Evidence of this expansion and intensity of contacts comes
from the epics Silappadikaram and Manimekalai and the Bud-
dhist remains at Kavérippumpattinam dated in the fourth
and fifth centuries ap,'!! while Kafcipuram comes up with
indirect evidence of its continuous interest in the Southeast
Asian regions. The Manimekalai, in particular, reflects the
importance of this circuit, by locating many of the incidents
in the story of Manimékalai, both in her previous and
present births, in the Tamil cities of Puhar, Vanci, Madurai
and Kafici, and beyond the seas in other regions of South
and Southeast Asia (e.g. Savakam = Java and Manipallavam
116 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
= north Sri Lanka?).!" A Tamil Brahmi inscription from
Klong Thom (Thailand) of the third and fourth centuries
referring to a goldsmith, an early Sanskrit inscription from
Laos referring to a Pandya and a copper coin with the tiger
emblem are some of the recent discoveries’? which provide
further evidence of these contacts. The Andhra region also
comes up with references to people from these distant lands
(China) visiting the Buddhist sites,'’* while it is well known
that the Buddhist art of Amaravati influenced the early
sculptural art of Champa (Indo China).
These shifts brought the coastal regions into an exchange
network of terminal and transit trade and much of the
intra-regional exchange in Tamilakam was influenced by them.
The inter-t7zai exchange and the plunder mechanism of the
early Tamil polities for obtaining the resources for exchange
(trade) and gift should be seen as an effect of this sea-borne
trade, which brought in valuables, 1.e. prestigious goods like
wine, gold, horses, camphor, aromatic wood, silk, precious
stones etc.
The yavana ships were the main carriers of this trade as
described in the classical sources and the early Tamil texts.
There is no evidence of Indian ships going to the ports of the
Red Sea, nor is there any indigenous account exhibiting
knowledge of the geography of the western regions. However,
much of the coastal shipping between the west and east coasts
of south India and between the Tamil coast and Bengal may
well have been carried on in Indian ships. The references in
the Periplus'’’ to small types of vessels the natives used for
coastal traffic and the larger ones called samgara (made by logs
fastened together) would also refer to the native boats that
carried on the coastal traffic. A much larger vessel called the
kolandiaphonta, meant for high sea voyages, may have been
used for transporting spices and woods from the Southeast
Asian islands and for journeys to the Ganges delta. The Tamil
textual references to kalam, vangam and navay''® may be to
larger boats with masts and sails, while the pari (small strong
boats) was perhaps used for river transport down to the mouth
of rivers. This is attested by the references in Pattinappalai\"’
to the pahn at Puhar. i
Stimulus from Outside / 117
Individual traders from Tamilakam also appear to have
travelled probably in foreign ships, to the ports of the Red Sea
coast. The recently discovered Ostracon inscriptions at Quseir-
al-Qadim, written in Brahmi characters, reading Catan and
Kanan,''* (Tamil names) point to the presence of Tamil traders
at the Red Sea ports and perhaps even Alexandria, which was
the focus of much of the South Asian trade, from where the
goods reached Rome.
Tamil texts allude to the sea-faring instincts of the Tamils
and their rulers in the context of voyages and trade. The sea-girt
Pandya chiefdom'” was subject to deluges affecting the Pandya
coast, resulting in the transfer of their ‘capital’ from the coast
to the interior. The institution of a sea festival by a Pandya,
and the Cola’s neglect of the Indra festival causing a deluge
submerging the port of Kaverippumpattinam, are pointers to
the importance of the sea in contemporary beliefs. The Sangam
rulers’ ‘mastery’ of the sea is often symbolically described as in
the case of the Pandya who threw a spear to drive back the sea,
the sea as the Pandya’s footstool and the Cola claims to have
descended from an ancestor who harnessed the monsoon winds
for sea trade.!*9 The poems often drew their metaphors from
the sea. An elephant running amuck is compared to a storm-
tossed ship,'?! while ship=wrecks seem to have been common.
The Tamils’ knowledge of boat/ship building 1s also attested by
the references to artisans skilled in the repair and refitting of
ships and by descriptions like ‘the timber that swims the great
ocean’ (perunkadal nurdiya maram).'”
V
URBAN CENTRES IN EARLY HISTORICAL
TAMILAKAM
The foregoing discussion on the early Tamil society and eco-
nomy, with the main focus on the nature oft rade, sets the
background for situating the urban centres of this period. First,
the dual centres of the major chiefdoms, often grandiosely called
kingdoms, will be taken up.
118 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
The Cera Centres
.. VANCI KARUVUR (KARUR, TIRUCHIRAPALLI DISTRICT)
Vanici/Karuvur, the ancient political centre of the Sangam Ceras,
may be identified with modern Karur located on the banks of
the Amaravati river, a tributary of the Kavéri, in the middle
reaches of the valley. Karuvur, known to the Sangam classics,
the epics and the later didactic works,'” was also called Vafici
and Vafici Murram.'4 The river An Porunai (Amaravati) flowed
along this place, which was the capital of the Cera Kotai.'”
The earlier identification of Vafici with Tiruvaficaikkalam
(Kodungallur or Cranganore) on the west coast was based on
the similarity of the names Vafici and Tiruvaficaikkalam,'** and
the occurrence of a place called Karur near the latter. The
identification with Karur in the interior subsequently proposed
by K.A. Nilakanta Sastri and M. Raghava lyengar'’’’ has been
confirmed by explorations and excavations in the region inland,
i.e. in and around Karur. Foreign notices by Ptolemy would
also show that Korura (Karur) was an inland town.'* A number
of references from the Purananuru, Patirruppattu and the epics
may be cited to show that Karuvur and Vajfici were identical.
Later herostone inscriptions from Karur datable to the eighth
century AD refer to the place both as Karur and Vani.”
Attempts made to locate Vafici in Tiruvafcaikkalam near
Muciri, the Céra port, have been unsuccessful, as no significant
archaeological remains have been found at this site prior to the
eighth century ap. That this centre was the capital of the early
medieval Cera kingdom of Makkotai (Mahodayapuram) has,
however, been established. What is also of interest is that apart
from the coastal Muciri, a small town called Muciri also exists
near the inland town of Kariir, on the route to Tiruchirappalli,
the ancient Uraiyar of the Colas. Unlike the excavations at
Kodungallur, the excavations in the inland Kartr by the Tamil
Nadu Department of Archaeology have provided positive clues
to its location, such as Roman amphora pieces, local Rouletted
Ware, a Roman copper coin in one of the lower strata and
BRW, some with graffiti marks.!°
Karur’s importance as a political and commercial centre is
Stimulus from Outside J 119
also attested by other archaeological finds in and around the
town. Apart from the prized Roman aureus of Claudius (ap 41-
54) from Karur, a large number of Roman coins, especially the
hoard from nearby Vellalur, and the recent discovery of Céra
coins in the Amaravati river bed provide supportive evidence.
The occurrence of several silver coins of Makkotai, with the
bust, apparently of the Cera ruler, believed to be influenced by
the Roman coins with portraits, suggests that Karur may have
been a mint town. The literary references to Karur as a centre
of jewel making are corroborated by the finds of some of the
oldest finger rings with intaglio, one being a muithuna of the
Amaravati style, others with Graeco-Roman motifs like cupid,
a warrior figure on a prancing lion with Hellenistic attire, with
Buddhist symbols like the ¢tnratna/nandipada and Brahmi
legends with personal names, all assignable to the period between
second century Bc and first century aD.'”' It is also significant
that the Vellalur hoard of Roman coins contained jewels with
Roman intaglios.'** A gold merchant from Karur figures as the
donor of a stone bed to a Jaina ascetic at Pukalur, not far from
Karur.'® ,
Coins, without portraits, but with symbols like the bow and
arrow, the Cera emblem, a mountain, double fish and a tiger
and legends reading ‘Kollippurai’ (meaning Poratyar, the rulers
of the Kolli hills, have also been found in Kariar.'** This would
further support the presence of a mint in this centre. Different
lineages of the Céras with suffixes like the Kotai (Makkotai),
Porai (Irumporai) and/or Atan (Ceralatan) are known from the
Sangam texts and the epigraphic and coin finds confirm that
they ruled in and around Karur. Significantly, the Tamil Brahmi
inscriptions from Pukalur and Arachchalur, not far from Karur
on the Kongu highway, recording gifts to the Buddhist and/or
Jaina ascetics, by the Céra ruling family and by merchants,
craftsmen etc., refer to three generations of Céra rulers’ and
point to the influence of the Sramanic religions over the trading
community and the rulers. Kodumanal, the Kodumanam of
Patirruppattu, situated nearby, with evidence of a large gem and
jewel manufacturing centre, adds to Karur’s importance as a
commercial centre.
The evidence of the epics, which are chronologically later than
120 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
the Sangam anthologies, would again point to the development
of Karur into a large urban complex and the inclusion in it of
Buddhist and Jain establishments. The Manimékalai refers to a
caitya in Vaiici, believed to have been built by a predecessor of
Kovalan (the hero of the Silappadikaram), who became a monk
after giving away his wealth, evidently to the Buddhist institution.
He, it is said, was a friend of the contemporary Cera ruler and
the caitya was built ‘in brilliant white stucco with its turrets
reaching the sky’.'*° At Vafici, an Indra vthara 1s also said to have
been built resembling the one at Puhar.’’’ The reference to /ndra
vibaras suggests that Buddhist establishments came up on the
outskirts of big urban centres and it became a common literary
tradition to ascribe them to divine authorship or to great kings
like Asoka, by pilgrims and foreign travellers. In some cases, as
in Vafici and Puhar, they may have been erected by merchants
or trading groups, while later tradition provided them with great
antiquity.’ At the time of a famine in Kaficipuram, we are told,
the Buddhist mendicants abandoned the city and settled down
in the whara at Vanci.'*? In the excavations at Karur, however,
no such structures or their remains have been unearthed, whereas
Puhar has something to offer in the form of remains of cattya
and vthara structures, albeit of the period from fourth to sixth
centuries AD.
2. MUCIRI (KODUNGALLUR/CRANGANORE,
TRICHUR DISTRICT, KERALA)
Muciri, the first and the earliest major port of call,'*® was the
famous Cera port where the ships of the yavanas called in large
numbers, and in exchange for gold took back cargoes of pepper
and other products.’"' According to the Periplus, Muziris
abounded in ships sent there with cargoes from Ariake (Arabia)
and Greek ships from Egypt.'® Pliny, however, warns that pirates
from Nitrias (Cannanore or Mangalore?) make Muziris not a
desirable place of call and ships had to anchor at some distance
from the shore and the cargoes had to be landed and shipped
by employing boats. It was the land of the Coelobothros
(Keralaputra?) and pepper came from Cottanara (Kuttanadu).
Muziris and Nelcynda are often spoken of together by the
Stimulus from Outside / 121
Periplus while listing the imports and exports from this port.
Nelcynda was, however, a Pandyan port. The imports were ‘a
great quantity of coin, topaz, thin clothing—not much, figured
linens, antimony, coral, crude glass, copper, tin, lead, wine—not
much (?) but as much as at Barygaza, realgar, orpiment, wheat,
enough for the sailors, for this is not dealt in by the merchants
there’. The exports were ‘pepper from Cottanara, great quantities
of fine pearls, ivory, silk cloth, spikenard from the Ganges,
malabathrum from the places in the interior, transparent stones
of all kinds (beryls etc.?), diamonds, sapphires and tortoise
shell,—_that from Chryse island and that taken among the islands
along the coast of Damirica’.'** What is significant is that many
of these items as exports and imports are archaeologically
attested in South India, while a trade agreement of the second
century AD between a Muciri merchant and a Greek refers to
quite a few of them.
Muciri’s importance as a major port of trade remained
unaffected from second century BC to second century AD
even after the circumnavigation of the peninsula took Greek
ships directly to the Coromandel coast, where Puhar developed
as the chief port. As late as the second century AD, evidence
of trade in bulk goods between Muciri and Alexandria in
Egypt comes from a papyrus in the Vienna Museum"™? record-
ing a trade agreement in Greek between a vanikar from
Muciri and a trader (Greek?) from Alexandria. The agreement
was apparently written in Alexandria, according to which
certain specified quantities of Gangetic nard (700 to 1700 Ib.),
ivory items (4700 lb.) and a variety of textiles (790 Ib.),
whose value was equal to the price of 2400 acres of land
in Egypt (one shipment—a single merchant’s merchandise)
were to be exported from Muciri, in ships to a Red Sea
port, then taken on camel crossing the desert and the Nile,
reaching Coptos and then shipped to the Mediterranean
town of Alexandria. It was subject to a 25 per cent customs
duty on import, the costs covering risks of possible brigandage
en route. It is estimated that one ship could carry the mer-
chandise of about one hundred and fifty merchants. What
the Muziris contract underlines is that the Indian trade was
of a substantial scale by the second century ap with Muziris
122 ra Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
continuing to be the emporium for goods even from the
east coast,!“° requiring enormous financial outlay.
The P andya Centres
3. MADURAI (MADURAI DISTRICT)
Madurai, the political centre of the Pandyas, was perhaps the
most important of the Tamil cities in the early historical period.
As the seat of the third Tamil Sangam (literary academy), which
the Pandyas patronized, it was the Tamil city par excellence, where
the Tamil cultural traditions were fostered. A whole text of the
Sangam collection, viz. Maduratkkanci, is devoted to its descrip-
tion, just as Pattinappalai to Puhar. It was the scene of many
enlightening episodes and stories connected with the Sangam
poets, which later became inscribed in the traditions of the city,
and also the second major setting for the story of Kovalan and
Kannaki of the Silappadikaram of the fifth to sixth centuries aD,
the first being Puhar.
The Maduratkkanci, the longest poem in the Pattuppattu col-
lection, and datable to the second century AD, gives a graphic
description of Madurai as a large and beautiful city, with a
palace, a number of temples, two large markets (bazaars?) and
well laid out streets with lofty mansions.'” It had protective
ramparts (walls) with huge gates and towers, surrounded by a
deep moat, with the Vaigai river skirting the city walls forming
a natural defence on one side. People of different social strata
and speaking different languages lived in different localities,
professionals and craftsmen crowding the streets with their
wares. Peddlars and petty traders also plied a brisk trade in the
shade of the lofty mansions. Vedic/brahmanic and non-Vedic/
non-brahmanic (Sramanic) religious houses or places of worship
also existed.'* The Netunalvatai repeats some of these descrip-
tions and adds that the apartments of the palace were lit by
yavana lamps and drunken mileccas (yavanas?) roamed about the
streets with their dresses hanging loose on the back and front.'”
It is doubtful whether such verbal imagery of the Madurai city
and its mansions is a reflection of the reality, for no site of
early historical Tamilakam has revealed archaeological remains
Stimulus from Outside / 123
commensurate with the conventionalized descriptions in the
texts.
The picture of the market place in Madurai is equally graphic
in Maduratkkana and Netunalvatai and yet need not be set aside
as conventional, for, the artisanal and trading activity as de-
scribed in the text are supported by the nature of vestiges around
Madurai and in other early sites. The texts say that it was a big
market, a converging point for traders, a centre of crafts like
gold jewels, gold statues (?) ivory, inlay work and stucco images.
The gold merchants were specialists who could testify to the
fineness of gold and goldsmiths, well skilled in drawing thin
wires from molten gold. There were traders in pearls and
precious gems who had their shops in the markets. Chank
cutting and bangle making were also important.'’® That it was
the source of the best cotton is mentioned in the Arthasastra,
although whether this text meant the old Madurai on the coast
or the one in the interior is not certain.’
Meaningful archaeological excavations in the present town
of Madurai are virtually impossible due to its continuous
occupation. Yet, the region around Madurai has come up with
interesting epigraphic evidence in the form of the earliest Tamil
Brahmi inscriptions (second century Bc onwards) from Tirup-
parankunram, Alagarmalai, Mankulam and other sites. Roman
coins have also been found, some in Madurai itself,'°* while a
hoard of silver punch-marked coins, from a place called Bodi-
naikkanur, with the double carp symbol on the reverse (along
with other punch marks on the obverse), has been assigned to
the Pandyas as their issue.’*? Square copper coins (with the
elephant and fish symbols) found in the region are also con-
sidered as Pandya dynastic issue. Recent discoveries of coins
with the legend ‘valutiy’ or Peruvalutiy,'** would add support
to the view that local coin issues (of Céras and Pandyas) were
influenced by the large maritime cormmercial transactions of
the period.
4. KORKAI (TIRUNELVELI DISTRICT)
Korkai was another major port and one of the dual centres of
the Sangam Pandyas. The Pandyas are often called Korkai
124 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Koman and Korkai Véendu (Véndu and Koman mean the great
chief/king).!°° Located on the south-east coast at the mouth of
the Tamraparni river, Korkai is now six kilometres to the interior
due to the recession of the sea in recent times. The urn burial
site of Adichanallur, also on the banks of the Tamraparni, 1s
about fifteen kilometres west of the present village of Korka1.
Sawyerpuram, the microlithic site (teri site) is only three kilo-
metres away. Altogether the area is rich in archaeological
remains, with an important group of proto-historic sites.
An early occupation of Korkai by the urn-burial folk, 1.e.
much earlier than the other dated sites of the Megalithic phase
in the Tamil country, is indicated by the Adichanallur urn-
burials of a large size, the urn-burials of the Megalithic phase
and the Radio Carbon dates of the lowest levels of occupation
at Korkai, 1.e. 785 Bc.'*© The occurrence at Korkai, of BRW,
Roman Ware, Rouletted Ware of local origin, sherds with
graffiti, inscribed potsherds with Brahmi characters of second
century BC to second century AD, and brick structures is consis-
tent with the results so far obtained from other excavated sites
in the Tamil country. However, a few sherds identified as of
Northern Black Polished Ware (or are they a special fine variety
of Rouletted Ware?) takes this site back at least to third century
BC (Mauryan period), while the charcoal sample and a piece of
wood at the lower levels of KRK-I have given an R.C. date of
785 Bc, taking it further back in time.'’’? This early date for
Korkai, in many ways, points to the growth of early coastal
traffic and trade linking the Bay of Bengal coasts from Bengal
to northern Sri Lanka, via Andhra and Tamil coasts.
Korkai, according to Sangam literary tradition, was a far-
famed port (Pugal mali sirappir Korkai munturai) and reputed for
its pearls.'** Kayal (meaning salt pans) which is located not far
from Korkai, was well known for its salt pans.’ The Periplus
talks of Colchi (Korkai) and its pearl fisheries worked by
condemned criminals.' To the Greeks the Gulf of Mannar was
Colchic gulf.'®
The occurrence of pearl oysters at various levels in the Korkai
excavations provides confirmation of the literary evidence that
Korkai was a centre of pearl fishers and trade in pearls.'* The
Arthasastra’s reference to the pearls of the Pandya country and
Stimulus from Outside J 125
the number of places where they were obtained also suggests
that the whole stretch of coasts of the Indian-Ceylon straits was
the source of pearls.'®
The Cola Centres
5. URAIYUR (TIRUCHIRAPALLI DISTRICT)
Uraiyur, at present a part of Tiruchirapalli town, represents the
site of the ancient ‘capital’ of the Sangam Colas. It was also
known as Koli and Varanam.'™ Descriptions of Uraiyur in the
Sangam texts indicate that it was a strongly defended city and
its outskirts had burial grounds which were full of stones and
hence ‘there were many obstacles to easy movement’.’® This
description is strongly suggestive of the existence of Megalithic
cairn circles and burials. The earliest levels of the excavated site
in Uraiyur have BRW and other early pottery as in other
excavated sites and point to the Megalithic antecedents of early
Tamil culture.
The Cola Karikala is said to have enlarged this town, fortified
it and enriched it with beautiful buildings.’® It was as important
as Puhar or Kavérippimpattinam, the port city of the Colas
and both these centres were developed by the same Cola ruler,
. Karikala.
Excavations at Uratyir'® have established a cultural sequence
of three periods. Period I'® is represented by BRW, the Russet-
coated Painted Ware, the Rouletted Ware, Arretine Ware,
together with the associated Red and all-Black Wares. Sherds
with graffiti and Brahmi inscriptions assignable to the first and
second centuries AD have also been met with. Period II shows
a gradual disuse of BRW and the emergence of the Red Slipped
Ware. A rectangular cistern, which the excavators describe as a
dyeing vat, also belongs to this period. This, if correct, would
confirm the literary evidence on the famous Uraiyiur textile
industry and the reference in the classical sources to Argaritic,
a fine fabric form Argaru, i.e. Uraiyur.
Evidence of flood and waterlogging in one of the cuttings
would suggest a disturbance due to the destruction of this site
by a flood in the Kavéri. Reference to a flood which occurred
126 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
in the area in c AD 944 is made in an inscription from Allur,
five kilometres from Uraiyir.'* The flood may thus be as-
sociated with period III, assigned to the eighth-fourteenth cen-
turies, which is represented by a crude ill-fired Red Ware,
Celadon Ware, besides terracotta figurines and beads of semi-
precious stones. Uraiyur, as is well known, continued to be a
political centre of the imperial Colas of ninth to thirteenth
centuries AD. The only epigraphic evidence on the antiquity of
this site, taking it back to the early historical period, comes
from a Brahmi inscription at Tiruchirapall:.'”°
Thus, it would appear that archaeological remains 1n Uratyur
are not very illuminating for the early historical period and
in no way equal to the literary descriptions of the place. The
problems that confront the archaeologist here are of the same
nature as in other early historical urban centres, 1.e. their
continuous occupation and the disturbance caused by it. A
large urban complex developed here in the medieval and
modern periods and Uraiyur became a part of it.
«. KAVERIPPUMPATTINAM/PUHAR (TANJAVUR DISTRICT)
Kaverippumpattinam or Puhar, one of the dual centres of the
Colas, was the chief port on the east coast in the early historical
period and continued to be so till at least the fifth to sixth
centuries AD. It was known to the Periplus as Camara and to
Ptolemy as Khaberis.'7' Much of our knowledge oft his town is
derived from the Sangam works and the epics. The Pattina-
ppalai, one of the Sangam collections, is devoted wholly to its
description, while the post-Sangam epics, wiz the Silappadi-
karam and the Manimekalai contain numerous references to the
town, its various quarters, religious and secular buildings. Its
development into a fairly large urban complex is evident from
the Pattinappalai, while the epics show that it included Buddhist
and Jain establishments, apart from a number of shrines of the
brahmanical and folk deities.'””
The city was known by several names such as Puhar, Kakandi
and Sampapati.'”? The last name seems to be preserved to this
day in the name of the Sampapati temple, believed to have been
the tutelary deity of the town. The city is described in literature
Stimulus from Outside / 127
as Perur and Managar (big town/city).' No less than forty odd
sites may be located near the present site of Kavérippimpattinam
which once formed part of the city. Some of them are Vanagiri,
Vellaiyaniruppu (the abode of the white men—yavanas?).
Sayavanam, Manigramam (Vanika-grama) and others, where
archaeological digging has brought to light occupational debris
belonging to a period ranging from « third century Bc to fifth
century AD. The diggings at Vellaiyaniruppu have, contrary to
expectations, not revealed any early yavana settlement, but only
show a deposit going back to the ninth century ap.’”
The city had two main parts, the Pattinappakkam or the
residential area and the Maruvurpakkam or the coastal area with
its harbour. The residential area is also called Akanagar (internal
city), which was evidently the prosperous section, where the
richer classes lived and where there were residential buildings
(of brick), feeding houses, gardens, public meeting places, public
baths, tanks and religious structures, etc.'” The coastal area
contained the harbour, customs offices with the tiger emblem
(of the Colas) on their doors, storehouses, godowns, merchants’
quarters and a fishermen’s colony. People speaking different
tongues, including foreigners, lived there.'”” The nalangad: (day
market) and the allangadi (evening market) met in the spacious
open area between the two main divisions of the city on the
east and the west.'”
The cemetery and burial ground situated on the outskirts of
the city also had their guardian deities such as the deity in the
pillar.'”?
Excavations, however, have not revealed relics of early struc-
tures of such magnitude and grandeur as described in literature.
The only significant finds are of a brick structure in Kilatyur,
identified as a wharf, where boats were anchored with the help
of wooden pegs.'® The wharf is dated to about the fourth to
third century Bc based on the R.C. date (315 Bc) for the
wooden sample from this structure, apart from the evidence
of the BRW deposits. The size of the wharf would also show
that it was probably an anchoring site for boats (pahrt) bringing
goods from the interior or from large ships halting a little
away from the shores, as evidence of a harbour with docking
facilities is lacking.'*! The tradition that Kaverippumpattinam
128 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
was submerged in the sea on account of a curse on the city
due to the failure of a Cola king to conduct the Indra festival,'*”
has led to the belief that part of the ancient city is now under
water. Efforts are on to check such a possibility through
underwater archaeology. A survey conducted on the beach
about six kilometres from the water’s edge is reported to have
shown indications of buried archaeological remains under the
sand (?). As late as 1849, encroachments of the sea are believed
to have washed away part of the ancient town.'*
Remains of a semi-circular brick structure with an internal
diametre of eight metres, have been unearthed at Vanagiri, which
may represent a water reservoir fed by a wide inlet channel of
eighty-three centimetres from the Kaveri. Associated deposits
yielded BRW and Rouletted Ware, and, as such, a first century
AD date is indicated.'*
The most striking remains are those of a Buddhist wihara at
the site called Pallavanesvaram consisting of a full wing of cells
and a long verandah on the south. A subsidiary structure,
probably of an apsidal caitya, together with other Buddhist
objects found here, has been assigned to the fourth to fifth
centuries AD, with constructions of a still later phase.'** The
Buddhist remains generally confirm the evidence of the epics.
The site of Manigramam yielded deposits of BRW and
Rouletted Ware of different fabrics, in addition to terracotta
figurines and square copper coins of the Colas, all assignable
to the beginning of the Christian era.'** The coins bear the
figure of a standing tiger (?) on the obverse and an elephant on
the reverse. One of the symbols on the coins has also been
identified as a fish or kalpavrksa.'*’ The name Manigramam (or
Vanika-grama) indicates the presence of a merchant quarter.
Significantly, Manigramam is also the name borne by a famous.
merchant guild of early medieval South India.'** Thus, it would
appear that the urban complex of Puhar included in it a
merchant colony, which provided the background to the story
of the Silappadikaram.
Puhar, the Cola port, seems to have superseded all other ports
of South India, when, in the perennial conflict among the
vendar for hegemony and control over the resources of one
another, the Colas emerged more successful and developed their
Stimulus from Outside / 129
port as the port of destination and embarkation for the major
resources of Tamilakam, Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia, and
stationed their officers to oversee the import and export of
commodities. Thus, the merchandise that came to Puhar shows
a great variety.
War horses that came by sea
Bags of black pepper brought overland by cart
gems and gold from the northern mountain
sandal and akil wood from the western mountain
pearls of the southern and corals of the eastern sea
The produce of the Ganges basin and Kaveri valley
Foodstuffs from Ceylon and luxuries from Kadaram
(Pattinappalai \\. 185-191)
What is perhaps more important is that it retained its
pre-eminent position at least till the fifth-sixth centuries ap,
providing a major outlet and entry point (Puhar = entry point?
or does it refer to the Kavéri entering the sea?) for the commerce
with Southeast Asia. It would, therefore, be tempting to char-
acterize it as a gateway'® to Tamilakam till the early medieval
period, when it was superseded by Nagappattinam as the major
Cola port.
The Centres of the Tiraiyar (Tondaiman)
7. KACCI (KANCIPURAM, CHINGLEPUT DISTRICT)
Kaficipuram, well known in history as the capital of Pallavas as
early as mid-fourth century ap,'” was the Kacci of the Sangam
texts. In early Tamil literature Kafici is known as Kacci, Kac-
cimurram and Kaccippédu, the last one probably a suburb, from
where a number of Tamil poets hailed. Kafici and Kaficinallur
also refer to the same town.'”!
The Kaficipuram excavations have been spread over several
parts of the city and the relevant ones for the early historical
period are those conducted in the premises of the Sankara
matha and near the Kamaksi temple.’ The first site has indi-
cated three periods of occupation, of which Period IA (second
century Bc to third century AD?) has BRW in early levels, Black
130 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Slipped Ware and Rouletted Ware and conical jars in the upper
levels, apart from a coin of Rudra Satakarni of the second
century AD and terracotta figurines. Period IB is assigned to the
fourth-ninth centuries AD, i.e. of the Pallavas, and is represented
by Bright and Red Slipped Ware, lead and copper coins and
moulds. Period II is of early medieval times (Cola period) and
period III is of modern occupation.
In the excavations near the Kamaksi temple, a three period
stratification has been made, of which the first two are relevant.'”°
Period I is represented by fine BRW in its lower levels (IA), and
Painted Ware assignable to the period from the third century Bc
to first century Bc, and the upper levels (IB) show BRW,
Rouletted, Arretine Wares, beads, terracotta objects and iron
objects and remains of a baked brick structure identified as a
Buddhist shrine. Period II (fourth to ninth centuries AD) 1s
represented by conical jars (miscalled amphorae) or local imita-
tions of amphorae, fine Bright Red and Orange Slipped Wares,
glass and other objects. The small ‘circular’ structure identified
as a votive stapa'™ cannot conclusively be proven to be a stupa,
as, apart from a few courses of brick, neither the outline or plan
of the structure nor its shape is traceable. The bricks are, however,
of considerable size (50/22/6 cm) and comparable to those of
Andhra Buddhist sites.
Traditions regarding the Buddhist associations of Kafici ap-
pear only in the post-Sangam texts, no specific references occur-
ring in the Sangam anthologies to Kafici as a Buddhist centre.
Buddhist institutions are first mentioned in the Manimekalai.
Again, it is only in the accounts of Hsuan Tsang that Kajfici’s
Buddhist associations are stressed and the Chinese pilgrim
suggests great antiquity for Buddhism in Kafici by referring to
stupas of the Asokan period.'> The Mattavilasa Prahasana, a
burlesque attributed to the Pallava king Mahendravarman of
early seventh century AD, refers to a Buddhist vihara in Kanici.'”
Similarly, with the exception of the Tamil Brahmi inscription
from Mamandur the earliest datable evidence of the presence
of Jainism also belongs to the fourth-sixth century period, as
seen in the Tirunatharkunru epitaph of the fourth century ap,
the Jain work called the Lokavibhaga of the fifth century aD and
the Pallankoyil copper plates of « ap 550.!%”
Stimulus from Outside / 131
The Perumpanarruppatai'** gives a graphic description Kacci
as a ‘Mudur (old town) formed by a number of settlements. It
had tall buildings of brick and was fortified by high walls. The
palace of Ilamtiraiyan, the chief of the Tondatyar, is described
with poetic fancy, marked by occasional glimpses cf realism.
The river Véghavati (Vehka), on which the city stood, comes in
for elaborate treatment and its associations with Mal (Visnu)
are highlighted. Such descriptions hardly find archaeological
corroboration. Archaeological work in cities like Kafici is con-
fronted with problems arising from continuous occupation and
a lack of potential areas for digging. However, through trial
digging, insights into the antiquity of such sites can be provided.
There is thus little doubt that the archaeological record in Kafici
goes back to the Megalithic or BRW period.
Kafnci’s contacts with the world outside may be traced back
to at least second century BC, if the work of Pan Kou, a Chinese
writer of the first century AD, is to be trusted. Pan Kou’s 7s’ten
han Chou points to contacts between Houang-tche (Kafici) and
China, by referring to the exchange of goods and presents
between the Chinese emperor P’ing (Yuan-che period) and the
king of Houang-tche. According to Pan Kou, the Chinese
emperor sent presents to the king of Houang-tche and asked
for a return ‘embassy’ with a live rhinoceros as tribute. People
from Houang-tche sent tributes from the time of emperor Wou
(140-86 Bc). Other goods like shining pearls, glass and rare
stones in exchange for gold and silk are also mentioned. The
journey from China took about ten months to one year through
Pagan (Burma).'”
With the Roman world, Kafici’s contacts seem to have
been indirect, perhaps through its port Nirppeyarru. Although
no Roman coins have been found in Kafci, the fact that
several finds are known from the region around it, 1.e. in
Tondainadu—such as Mamallapuram (port), Madurantakam
(a place called Alamporai), Saidapet and Mambalam (both
in present Madras city) would point to the region’s par-
ticipation in the Roman trade. The Rouletted Ware found
in Kafici may be of a local variety, with the rouletting
technique travelling from the ports (coastal area) to the
interior. While the Arretine Ware finds in Kafici are negligible,
132 y. Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
the red conical jars were imitations of the amphora, the
true amphora finds being confined to Arikamedu and Vasava-
samudram,” apart from a site called Karaikkadu.
8. VASAVASAMUDRAM (NEAR SADRAS,
CHINGLEPUT DISTRICT)
Situated at the mouth of the river Palar, this site is about thirteen
kilometres south of Mamallapuram. Excavations at this site have
unearthed pieces of amphora, Rouletted Ware, double ring wells
and other objects like beads. Remains of brick structures, ter-
racotta ovens and heaps of shell lime, all assignable to a single
period of occupation (1.92 metres deposit) from the first to
third century AD have also been found. Significantly, there 1s
no BRW deposit at the site, although the general assemblage
and antiquities correspond to those at Arikamédu.”” Hence,
Vasavasamudram represents the later phase of Roman trade,
when the east coast’s trade had become intensified. It also seems
to have continued to be a part of it when the Roman trade was
at its lowest ebb in the Byzantine period.
The real significance of Vasavasamudram lies in its location
in relation to Kafici. Situated on the banks of the Veghavati, a
tributary of the Palar, Kafici has access to the sea only through
Palar and hence some early port at the mouth oft he Palar, may
well have served as the ancient port oft he Tiraiyar of the Sangam
texts. Vayalur, where a historic inscription of Rajasimha Pallava
datable to early eighth century has been found, is located two
miles south of Vasavasamudram. The latter could well have been
a part of Vayalir, which is known as the ‘pilavayil’—entrance
way.’
taining descriptions of Kafici and other places in Tondainadu,
refers to a port called Nirppeyarru. Nirppeyarru is described
as a big port with a lighthouse (in the days of Tondaiman
[lamtiraiyan, a contemporary of Karikala Cola), with broad
streets, tall houses (of merchants), fishermen’s quarters (para-
tavar), godowns guarded by professional men, and with a
harbour full of ships bringing white horses and precious stones.
The tall lighthouse on the shore guided the ships. This site
Stimulus from Outside J 1335
has been identified with Nirppér in the Madurantakam taluk
of Chingleput district and with Mamallapuram.”™ It is said that
Nirpayarrurai (turai = ghat = harbour) was later corrupted in to
Nirppeyarru.
It is, however, more in keeping with the archaeological
evidence at Vasavasamudram to identify it with Nirppeyarru,
with evidence of its connections with the western trade. Al-
though Mamallapuram has some evidence in the form of
Roman coins, the location of Vasavasamudram is of greater
importance in its identification. It may have been superseded
by Mamallapuram even by the fourth and fifth centuries ap,
when the Pallavas are known to have occupied Kafcipuram.
Hence, the occupational deposit at Vasavasamudram indicates
a single period.
O ther Cen tres
9. ALAGANKULAM (RAMANATHAPURAM DISTRICT)
Alagankulam is located at the mouth of the Vaigai river, on its
northern bank, now some distance away from the coast, from
where the opposite coast of Sri Lanka (north west) can be reached
by boat in about twenty-five minutes. It is identified with Saliyar
of the Sangam works.”” Here, the occupation levels indicate a
period from pre-third century Bc to the beginning of the sixth
century AD. The earliest levels show NBP ware, followed by BRW,
silver punch-marked coins of first and second centuries AD,
together with Roman Rouletted Ware (local?), amphorae, and a
very interesting and rare Pink Ware, of which thousands of
sherds have been found. Finally occur the late Roman coins of
Valentine II, Theodesius (388-393) and Arcadius (394-408).
The Pink Ware has been alternatively described as an African
Red Slipped Ware or an Afghan Ware and compared to some
potsherds of similar fabric from Arikamédu.”” Beads, semi-
precious stones and terracotta objects have also been reported.
Square copper coins of the Pandyas with the elephant, fish (?)
and auspicious symbols such as wheel and vase (purnaghata) are
other finds from the site. Some of the BRW sherds have graffiti
and Brahmi inscriptions.
134 J Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
The presence of the NBP may point to its importance in
early coastal traffic or trade with the Bengal coast and Andhra
coast, while the later levels with Roman antiquities suggest a
more direct involvement in the Roman trade from the second
to fifth centuries AD. This port is considered to be as important
as Puhar, Korkai and Arikamédu in the early historical trade
of Tamilakam with the Mediterranean region, and needs to be
carefully explored and mapped out. For, in its vicinity, are
located some sites which are identifiable with settlements men-
tioned in the Sangam works.
The name Alagankulam is evidently a later one for this ancient
port. The ancient site may be the same as Marungur pattinam
mentioned in the Akananuru. Two parts of this town, viz. Unir
(Nellin Unur), which abounded with paddy, and Marungur,
which was the commercial area on the coast, as described in this
work, recall the two divisions of Kavérippumpattinam (Puhar),
i.e. Pattinappakkam and Maruvurpakkam. The Maduratkkanca
also refers to a Nellin Ur as a busy port with ships bringing
goods from different countries. The waiting ships are compared
to a group of mountains about to seize the floods.” Nellin Ur
and Nellin Unur could well have been the same. Between Korkai
and Tondi (another Pandya port known from early medieval
sources) is a village called Marungur near the coast.
10. ARIKAMEDU (PODUCA/PODOUKE), PONDICHERY
One of the earliest sites to be excavated on the east coast,
confirming the Sangam literary evidence on the Roman trade,
Arikamédu, south of Pondicherry town, has been described as
an Indo-Roman trading station.2"° The Arikamédu excavations
have often served as a reference point offering ‘a firm datum
line from which the classification of pre-medieval South Indian
cultures can begin’. The site is assigned to the first and second
centuries AD by the early excavators. The associated BRW at this
site, it is believed, has been dated with greater precision on the
basis of the occurrence of the Arretine and Rouletted Ware and
the Roman amphorae. However, more recent excavations have
attempted to push back the beginnings oft he site to the second
century BC, again on the basis of the Rouletted and Arretine
Stimulus from Outside ff 1355
Ware and hence, also to date BRW earlier than the first or
second century ap.”!!
The earlier excavations have also brought to light brick
structures, one in the northern sector, identified as a warehouse,
and another in the southern sector, a structure with tanks and
courtyards, as one used in the preparation of muslin cloth, a
notable export from the Tamil region. Bead and glass manufac-
ture has also been identified. In addition, gems with intaglio
designs found in the site have been assigned to Graeco-Roman
craftsmen, suggesting their presence in Arikamédu.
Arikamédu has been identified with Virai, the modern
Virampattinam near the site, which was one of the vélir stron-
gholds known to Sangam literature. In the Akananuru, it is
described as a harbour of the vélir, while the Narnnai says that
it was the centre of the velir chieftain Virai Veliyan Venman.?”
Evidence in support of the veélir association of this centre has
been recognised in a BRW sherd with a Brahmi inscription
of the first century AD reading Yadu Balabhuti-y or Balabhuti
of the Yadu Clan.*” The velir claimed descent from the
Yadavas.”"* A Possible derivation of the Poduca/ Podouke of
the Periplus and Ptolemy is interesting in this connection.
Podouke may be derived from Podikai, a meeting place in a
clan settlement. Such Podikais were common among the
velir settlements of early Tamilakam.’"
Arikamédu’s importance in the Roman trade is generally
accepted. That traders from other countries were also regular
visitors to this port is suggested by the use of Simhalese characters
in the early Brahmi inscriptions on potsherds, one of which has
been read as bu ta sa, using the old Simhalese form sa for the
genitive case ending of the personal name bata.’'® This would
further strengthen the evidence on early coastal sea traffic along
the east coast down to Sri Lanka, from where Buddhist monks
and nuns are known to have visited the Andhra Buddhist centres.
11. KODUMANAL,”” PERUNDURAI TALUK
(PERIYAR / ERODE DISTRICT)
Kodumanal, the ancient Kodumanam of Patirruppattu, a Sangam
work, described as a centre of gem and jewel manufacturing, 1s
136 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
located on the north bank of the Noyyal river about forty
kilometres from Erode. Padiyur, with its beryl mines, is about
six kilometres south of it. The site’s location in the Kongu region
(the Coimbatore, Salem and Pertyar districts) with a concentra-
tion of Roman coin finds in hoards, must have influenced its
role as a nodal point on the overland trade route linking the
Kerala coast, through the Palghat gap, with the middle and lower
reaches of the Kaveri down to the ports of the east coast. Archaeo-
logical excavations have confirmed its importance as a jewel
manufacturing centre, with a large quartz zone providing semi-
precious stones. Due to the absence of chalcedony in this quartz
zone, with the exception of carnelian, which was brought probab-
ly from Gujarat, all other semi-precious stones”"® are available in
the region. A factory site for quartz objects has also been identi-
fied in the excavations at the centre. Kodumanal must have been
a large supplier of crystal objects to the port of Muciri, possibly
in exchange for Roman gold and silver coins and pottery.
The other major industry was of iron, with evidence of a
wide range of iron weapons, and other objects like spindles, a
large number of rusted iron stirrups, apart from slags along
with a factory site—perhaps the earliest iron foundry for melting
iron ore. Possibly iron objects were also meant for export. Hardly
twenty kilometres from Kodumanal lay an iron belt from the
Sennimalai (at present a weaving centre), with its magnetic iron
ore, upto Kanjamalai.
The site seems to have been in occupation from at least the
second century Bc to the fourth century AD, when it was
probably abandoned. Two cultural periods have been marked
in the occupational layers. Period I is represented by BRW,
which continues throughout in the habitation site, RCP in the
burials, iron objects, Red Polished and Black Polished Ware,
and evidence of artisanal and craft activities, especially gems.
BRW Graffiti is a crucial piece of evidence linking the habita-
tion with the burial site, as in both contexts the same graffiti
occurs. Each Megalithic burial has a special symbol on its
pottery, probably of a specific clan (?). The graffiti is similar
to some of the symbols occurring on punch-marked coins and
in early Tamil Brahmi inscriptions. Similar symbols are re-
ported from other Megalithic sites.2” Graffiti gives place to
Stimulus from Outside / 137
more Brahmi letters in the upper levels. Carnelian predominates
in the burials. This period is dated from the second century
BC to the second century aD. Period II is assigned to the second
and third centuries aD, when BRW and other pottery types
continue, but the scratching of letters goes into disuse. Evidence
of active iron-working and more agricultural activity is attested
to in the second period.
The site would thus seem to have been continuously active
in the early trade, both inland and maritime. The whole region
of the Amaravati and Noyyal rivers comes up with evidence
of traders constantly moving across. Along with ornaments of
gold (24 carat, though gold is limited), silver rings and a copper
tiger inlaid with precious stones, are other finds which point
to the nature of craft production and trade in jewels. Some
of the rings (silver and copper) have symbols, similar to the
Megalithic graffiti, and may have been signet rings or seals of
traders.“° The discovery in the river beds of numerous coins
of the Céra rulers, some with portraits and legends giving
names like Makk6tai and Kuttuvan Kotai would add to the
evidence of the Céra’s interest in promoting this trade. Al-
though very few punch-marked coins and only a single Roman
silver coin have been found in the habitation site at Kodumanal
itself, the region around the site, as noted earlier, has the
greatest concentration of Roman coin finds in South India,
leaving no room for dispute regarding the commercial signi-
ficance of this centre. The term migama occurring on a potsherd
would also indicate the presence of a merchant guild. However,
as guild organization is less conspicuously attested to in the
Tamil context, it may be suggested that trading groups from
the Deccan and Andhra may have been involved in the
commerce of this region. This is further supported by several
names of a Prakrit origin like Visakhi, Varuni and Kuvirian
(e.g. Varuni akal = the vessel of Varuni) found on potsherds,
in addition to Tamil names.
Kodumanal is one of the few centres where the links between
the Megalithic burial and habitation sites are established by
archaeological material, with clear evidence of their contem-
poraneity. The total area is of about fifty hectares, including a
habitation located in ten hectares, and a hundred burials. The
;
138 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
site has rich potential for studying the transitional stage from
proto-history to the early history of the region.
12. TIRUKKOYILUR (SOUTH ARCOT DISTRICT)
Tirukkoyilur was known to early Tamil texts as Kovalur (Koval)
and as the centre of the Malaiyaman chiefs of the vélir clan. Its
importance derives from its location on the banks of the South
Pennaiyar (Pennar) and on the route from the west coast to the
east coast (Arikamédu) za the Kongu region. Two significant
discoveries in recent years have established its nodal importance.
One is the early Brahmi inscription”! from a place called
Jambai, near Tirukkoyilur, recording the gift of a pali (cave) to
a Jaina ascetic by Netuman Ajfici, an Atiyaman chieftain (another
velir chief), who is here called Satiyaputo (=Atiyaman), possibly
after he defeated the Malaiyamans and occupied this region.?”
The reference to Satiyaputo has established that the Satiyaputras
of the Asokan edicts were the Atikaiman (Atiyaman) of Taka-
tur (Dharmapuri near Salem), who are praised in the Sangam
works for their generosity and valour.” The second discovery
is of a very large hoard of Roman aurei in a nearby village (by
a local labourer).?* The hoard contained 193 coins and some
pieces of jewellery, including a diamond ring. The coins are of
Nero (54-68 ab), Domitian (?) (93 ap) and Antonius Pius
(138-161 ap). Copper coins, believed to be the issues of the
Malatyaman chiefs, have also been discovered in Tirukkoyilir
and in private collections,”*> which may suggest a direct interest
shown by these chieftains in the early Roman trade.
Coastal Sites/ Towns
At this point it would be useful to follow the classical sources
and the coastal sites/towns that they are familiar with, apart
from those that have been taken up for description under the
dual centres of the early Tamil chiefdoms. While some of them
are not known from the Tamil sources, there are quite a few,
which can be identified with the help of archaeological material
and occasionally, also of literary references.
On the west coast, the Periplus, after enumerating other ports
Stimulus from Outside J 139
down the Maharashtra and Konkan coast, starts with the first
markets of Damirica (Tamilakam). These are Naura, the Nitra
of Ptolemy and Nitrias of Pliny, which is identified with
Cannanore, and Tyndis, identified with Ponnani. Both are
located in the kingdom of the Cerobothra.””° Beyond this, there
is no further reference to the nature of these centres, except,
that they seem to be no more than villages. After these two
comes Muziris, the Muciri of the Tamil sources.
The next site of some importance is the Neacyndon of Pliny,
Nelcynda of the Periplus and Melkynda or Nelkunda of
Ptolemy,” identified with Kottayam. Nelcynda is given equal
status with Muziris as a market of leading importance, but it
is stated to be in the Pandya (Pandion) country. Ptolemy places
it in the country of the Aioi, which closely resembles the name
of Ay of the velir clan, who ruled from Aykkudi (Potikai), the
Bettigo of Ptolemy. The Ays were lesser chiefs under the Pandyas.
Nelcynda must have been a part of the pepper trade of this
coast, as pepper was the major item from this port and Muziris.
Pepper was carried from Cottanara in canoes to Bacare””*
another small town (?) mentioned by the Periplus, identified with
Porakad, also at the mouth of the river (Meenachilar) on which
Nelcynda is located. Large ships are said to have come to these
market towns on account of pepper and malabathrum.
Beyond Bacare is another district, we are told, called Paralia
stretching along the coast towards the south around Cape
Comorin and as far as Adam’s bridge. On this coast is located
Comari (Cape Comorin/Kanya Kumari) which had a harbour
and a goddess shrine, where people came and offered worship.”
Balita (Varkkalai) is another village by the shore with a har-
bour.° After Comari is mentioned Colchi or Korkai, the
Pandya port.
Evidence on these sites either from literature or from ar-
chaeology, is practically non-existent or, at best, meagre. Hence,
it would appear that only those harbours which the major
chiefdoms promoted came to attain the status of ports or
emporia as they are called in the classical accounts.
The descriptions of Argaru that follow in the Periplus’”’
are somewhat hazy, for it is said to be a region lying inland
from a bay after Colchi. It is from this bay, we are told,
140 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
that the pearls gathered on this coast and from an island
called Epiodoros, as well as muslins called ebargareitides (argarik/
argaritic), were exported. While Epiodoros may be identified
with the island of Mannar,?” Argaru is said to be the same
as Uraiyur. The location of Argaru, however, seems to be
less certain, as it has also been suggested that it lay somewhere
near the Palk Bay,”? perhaps beyond the mouth of the
Vaigai, where Alagankulam, with its Roman vestiges, stands.
Ptolemy mentions a promontory called Kory, and beyond
it a place called Argeirou, and an emporium called Salour.’*
Kory is believed to be Koti of the Tamil sources and is
identified with Dhanuskoti (in the Ramesvaram promon-
tory).”> Interestingly, Salour may be the same as Saliyur of
Tamil sources, which 1s located near Alagankulam. This coast
is Opposite to the northwestern coast of Sri Lanka.
Sri Lanka (Ceylon), which, in the classical sources, is known
as Palaesimundu and Taprobane,”** is mentioned along with the
above coast, where Colchi, Kory, Argaru etc. are located. It is
described as a land of large elephants, gold and pearls, precious
stones and marble resembling tortoise shell.
Argaru 1s followed by Camara (Penplus) or Khaberis (Ptolemy),
the Kaverippimpattinam of the Tamil sources, Poduca or Po-
douke (Arikamédu) and Sopatma identified with Marakkanam
in the South Arcot district, north of Pondichery.?””? Then the
description passes on to the sites of the Andhra coast, i.e. Masalia.
References
1. Sudershan Seneviratne, ‘Kalinga and Andhra: The Process of
Secondary State Formation in Early India’, in Claessen and Skalnik
(eds), The Study of the State, The Hague, Mouton, 1981, 317-38.
2. Rock Edict xu. See Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, vol. 1, E.
Hultzsch (ed.), Inscriptions of Asoka, Archaeological Survey of
India, 1991, reprint, 43ff, 66ff, 81ff.
3, This relationship is pointed out as an essential part of societies
in transformation. See Robert McC. Adams, Evolution of Urban
Society: Early Mesopotamia and Pre-Hispanic Mexico, Chicago, 1966,
46-7.
Stimulus from Outside ’. 141
See Paul Wheatley, The Pivot of the Four Quarters, A Preliminary
Enquiry into the Origins and Character of the Ancient Chinese City,
Edinburgh, 1971, 377.
. R.Champakalakshmi, ‘Archaeology and Tami! Literary Tradition’,
Puratattva, 1975-6, vol. vin, 110-22.
. Clarence Maloney, ‘The Beginnings of Civilization in South
India’, Journal ofA sian Studies (JAS), 1970, vol. xxx, no. 3, 603-16;
idem ‘Archaeology in South India—Accomplishments and Pros-
pects’, in B. Stein (ed.), Essays on South India, New Delhi, 1976,
1-40.
Traditions of Céla Karikala building a dam across the Kaveri
river are late. However the Sangam works refer to his raising the
embankment of the Kavéri. See N. Subrahmanian, Sangam Polity:
The Administration and Social Life of the Sangam Tamils, Bombay,
1966, 208.
Conventional histories of this period lack an integrated approach
and hence provide a compartmentalized view of society, economy
and polity. See e.g. Subrahmanian, Sangam Polity. The present
discussion is based on the recent perspectives of historians who
follow not only an integrated approach but also use anthropologi-
cal and semiotic methods of analysis. See K. Sivathamby, ‘Early
South Indian Society and Economy: The Tinai Concept’, Social
Scientist, 1974, 20-37; idem ‘An Analysis of the Anthropological
Significance of the Economic Activities and Conduct Code
Ascribed to the mullai tinat’, Proceedings of the First International
Conference Seminar on Tamil Studies, IATR, 1966 (1968), vol. 1;
Rajan Gurukkal, ‘Forms of Production and Forces of Change in
Ancient Tamil Society’, Studies in History, July-Dec. 1989, vol. v,
no. 2, 159-76.
Tolkappiyam, Porulatikaram, 1, 14, 20, 21, 44, 46, 313 and 497.
Gurukkal, ‘Forms of Production’.
Ibid.
R. Kailasapathy, Tamil Heroic Poetry, OUP, 1968, 11-13, 73-4 and
260; G.L. Hart, ‘Ancient Tamil Literature, Its Scholarly Past and
Future’, in B. Stein (ed.), Essays on South India, New Delhi, 1976,
56-7. See also K. Sivaraja Pillai, Chronology of the Early Tamils,
Madras, 1932, 192-3.
13. The intrusion of the varna order is perhaps echoed in the
fourfold division of antanar, aracar, vaisiyar and vélalar referred
to in this section and would be the earliest evidence of such a
social division. See Tolkappiyam, Porulatikaram; 625-6, 632 and
635.
142 J Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
14. Gurukkal, ‘Forms of Production’, 168.
15. For the importance of primitive valuables in tribal societies, see
S.F. Ratnagar, Encounters: The Westerly Trade of the Harappa Ctviliza-
tion, Delhi, 1981, 242.
16. Gurukkal, ‘Towards a New Discourse: Discursive Processes in
Early South India’, in R. Champakalakshmi and S. Gopal (eds),
Tradition, Dissent and Ideology.
Ly M.G.S. Narayanan, “The Warrior Settlements of the Sangam Age’,
Indian History Congress, Proceedings, 43rd Session, Kurukshetra, 1982,
102-9.
18. The limited surplus potential, it is claimed, was enough to
sustain functionaries like preceptors, bards, dancers, magicians,
physicians and astrologers. See Gurukkal, “Forms of Production’,
168.
19. For the essential features of a janapada, see Thapar, From Lineage
to State, OUP, Bombay, 1984, 121ff.
20. Seneviratne, ‘Kalinga and Andhra’.
y © Gurty Venkat Rao, “The Pre-Satavahana and Satavahana Periods’,
in G. Yazdani (ed.), The Early History of the Deccan, New Delhi,
1982, reprint, parts I to vi, 80-2, 119.
Like Subrahmanian, Sangam Polity, 52-3, 269.
ye 3 Thapar, Cultural Transactions and Early India: Tradition and
Patronage, OUP, Delhi, 1987; also ‘Patronage and Community’,
in Barbara Stoler Miller (ed.), The Powers of Art, OUP, 1992. See
also Himanshu Prabha Ray, Monastery and Guild (Commerce Under
the Satavahanas), OUP, 1986.
24. Amita Ray, Life and Art in Early Andhradesa, Delhi, 1983, chap-
ter 11. Anjana Chatterjee, ‘Socio-Economic Conditions in Early
Andhra 200 Bc-ap 300—A Study oft he Transition from Megalithic
to Early Historic Culture’, Ph.D. Thesis (unpublished), Jawaharlal
Nehru University, New Delhi, 1976.
pak Indian Archaeology, A Review (IAR), 1964-5, para 42; 1965-6, para
35. See also Champakalakshmi, ‘Archaeology and Tamil Literary
Tradition’, 114.
26. I. Mahadevan, ‘Corpus of Tamil Brahmi Inscriptions’, in R. Naga-
swamy (ed.), Seminar on Inscriptions, Madras, 1968.
27. Champakalakshmi, ‘South India’, chapter 9, in A. Ghosh (ed.),
-" Art and Architecture, Bharatiya Jnanpith, New Delhi, 1974,
vol. |.
28. See Mahadevan, ‘Corpus’, nos 1, 2 and 57.
29. For migama in Tamil Brahmi inscriptions see Mahadevan, ‘Corpus’,
Stimulus from Outside / 143
nos 3 and 6. For references to puga, gosthi, nigama and Sreni in
Andhra, see Chatterjee, ‘Socio-Economic Conditions’.
. Uma Chakravarti, The Social Dimensions of Early Buddhism, OUP,
New Delhi, 1987, chapter m.
Mahadevan, ‘Corpus’, no. 3, 18-25.
See Friedhelm Hardy, Viraha Bhakti: The Early History of Krsna
Devotion in South India, Delhi, 1983.
Tolkapptyam, Porulatikaram, 5.
. Champakalakshmi, ‘From Devotion and Dissent to Dominance:
The Bhakti of the Tamil Alvar and Nayanar’, in Champaka-
lakshmi and Gopal, Tradition.
Notuttal—See Gurukkal, ‘Forms of Production’, 171.
Kurittumaretirppai or Kuni etirppai—See Subrahmanian, Pre-Pallavan
Tamil Index, Madras, 1966, 305.
K.K. Pillay, A Social History of the Tamils, University of Madras,
reprint, 247.
Gurukkal, ‘Forms’, 172; Thapar, ‘Black Gold: South Asia and the
Roman Maritime Trade’, South Asia (Journal of the South Asian
Studies Association), Armidale, NSW, Australia, Dec. 1992, n.s., vol.
xv, no. 2, 14-15.
Nalangadt-Akananuru, 93: 10; Maduratkkanc, |. 430; Allangadt-
Maduratkkanc, \. 544.
Silappadikaram, vi, 121-2.
. Pattinappalai, \\. 185-91; Silappadikaram, v: 18-20; 24-33; vi: 134-
45.
Maduratkkanc, \\. 395-401; 511-21; 536-44; Silappadikaram, XIV:
174-211.
. Pattinappalai, \\. 131-6; 120-4.
. Pattinappalai, \\. 209-12; J.V. Chelliah, Pattuppattu, The Ten Tamil
Idylls (Translated into English with Introduction and Notes),
SISSW, Tirunelveli, 1962, 2nd edn, 41.
45. See Bohannan and Dalton (eds), Markets in Africa, North Western
University Press, Illinois, 1962, 7-8, for the concept of the
‘peripheral’ market.
One of the three kinds of societies mentioned by them is the
society with peripheral markets, where the institution of the
market place is present, but the market principle does not
determine the acquisition of subsistence goods or the allocation
of land or labour resources. Bohannan and Dalton also prefer
to use the term ‘market-place-exchange’ and not ‘market ex-
144 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
change’, as land and labour transactions are absent in such
peripheral markets.
46. Rowlands, ‘Modes of Exchange and the Incentives for Trade
with Reference to Late European Pre-history’, in Colin Renfrew
(ed.), The Explanation of Culture and Change, Pittsburgh, 1973,
591.
47. G. Dalton, ‘Karl Polanyi’s Analysis of Long Distance Trade and
His Wider Paradigm’, in Jeremy A. Sabloff and Lamberg-
Karlovsky (eds), Ancient Civilization and Trade, Albuquerque,
o715,.99.
48. Robert J. Braidwood and Gordon R. Willey introduced these
terms in the volume edited by them. Courses Toward Urban Life:
Archaeological Consideration of Some Cultural Alternates, Viking
Foundation, Anthropology, 1962, no. 32; also McC Adams, The
Evolution of Urban Society, London, 1966, 9.
49. Bohannan and Dalton, Markets in Africa, 7.
50. People speaking diverse tongues, that come from great and
foreign homes mix freely on friendly terms with those who
occupy this glorious town, Pattinappalai, ||. 214-17; Chelliah,
1962: 41.
In different places of Puhar, the onlooker’s attention was
arrested by the abodes of Yavana, whose prosperity was never on
the wane. On the harbour are to be seen sailors who come from
distant lands, but for all appearances, they lived as one community.
Silappadikaram, v: 6-12; V.R.R. Dikshitar, The Cilappatikaram,
SISSW, Tirunelveli, 1978, 120.
51. Maduratkkanci, \\. 315-25; 75-89.
52. Periplus: 53-60. The referencest: o the Periplus are taken from J.W.
McCrindle, The Commerce and Navigation of the Erythraean Seas
and Ancient India as Described by Ktesias the Knidian, Calcutta, 1973,
Reprint.
Iai According to Polanyi, ‘Emporium’, in classical Greek terminol-
ogy, referred to ‘that part or sector of a coastal town which was
devoted to foreign commerce’. It came to denote ‘a large centre
of commerce’ only at a later date. It was a self-contained unit
with its own food, market, harbour, quay, warehouses, administra-
tive buildings, mariners’ houses and so on. See Karl Polanyi, ‘Ports
of Trade in Early Societies’, Journal of Economic History, 1963,
vol. xan, 34,
54. Charlesworth, ‘Roman Trade with India: A Resurvey’, in Coleman
he (eds), Studies in Roman Economic and Social History,
, 140.
Stimulus from Outside / 145
. Meanings of these terms are given as in the Tamil Lexicon, vols v
and vy, University of Madras, 1982, reprint.
. Maduratkkanct, \\, 503-6.
. Maduratkkana, \\. 397-401; 511-21; Silappadikaram, v: 24-39.
. Akandnuru, 39: 10; 167: 7; 245: 6; 291: 15; Narrinat, 182; 1-2,
254-6.
. Perumpdanarruppatai, |). 59-80; Chelliah, 109-11.
. Kamil Zvelebil, The Smile of Maurugan, On the Tamil Literature of
South India, Leiden, 1973, 100.
. Akananuru, 340: 16-17; 350: 11, Ainkurundru, 195: 1-2; Madurai-
kkanct, \\. 315-24; also Maloney, The Effect of Early Coastal Sea
Traffic on the Development of Civilization in South India, Ph.D.
Thesis (unpublished), University of Pennsylvania, 1968, 117.
. Perumpanarruppatai, \\. 319-24; Maloney, ‘The Effect of Early
Coastal Sea Traffic’, 118.
. See Vidya Dehejia, Early Buddhist Rock Temples, London, 1972;
Chatterjee, ‘Socio-Economic Conditions’.
. Mahadevan, ‘Corpus’, nos 34, 37, 38, 43, 60-8 and 72.
. Akananuru, 302; 306; Narnia, 250; Purananuru, 264; Mullat-
ppattu; See N. Subrahmanian, Pre-Pallavan Tamil Index, Madras,
1966, 148, 189, 269 and 637.
Perumpanarruppatai, \|. 322-4; Maduratkkanci, \\. 500-2.
. Maduratkkanci, \. 122.
. Pattinappalai, \\. 196-213; Chelliah, Pattuppattu, 41.
. See M. Webb, ‘The Flag Follows Trade—An Essay on the Interac-
tion of Military and Commercial Factors in State Formation’, in
Jeremy A. Sabloff and Lamberg-Karlovsky (eds), Ancient Civiliza-
tion and Trade, Albuquerque, 1975, 179.
J. Filliozat, ‘Intercourse of India with the Roman Empire during
the Opening Centuries of the Christian Era’, Journal of Indian
History, 1950, vol. xxvin, part 1, 39.
Silappadtkaram, v: 6-12.
. See R.E.M. Wheeler, Rome Beyond the Imperial Frontiers, London,
1955.
. Filliozat, ‘Intercourse of India’, 40-1; Maloney, ‘Early Coastal Sea
Traffic’, 184.
. Pliny, Natural History, v: 105; vi: 26-10; also Periplus. 55.
See Thapar, “Black Gold’, 1992, 25.
Mahadevan, ‘Corpus’, no. 51.
. Thapar, ‘Black Gold’, 17ff.
. Ibid.
Patirruppattu, 1, Patikam, \I. 4-10, Mullaippattu, \. 66.
146 / Trade, Tdeology and Urbanization
Silappadikaram, xiv: 66-7; xxv: 142; v: 76, Manimékalai, xxx: 108;
80).
Mullaippattu, |. 60 (Yavana carpenters).
. See Kodumanal in the section on urban centres.
_ Charlesworth, ‘Roman Trade’, 135.
. Warmington, Commerce Between the Roman Empire and India, New
Delhi, 1974, 58, reprint.
. See the lists in Appendices A and B.
. This discussion is based on the work of S. Suresh, ‘A Study of
the Roman Coins and Other Antiquities in India—With Special
Reference to South India’, Ph.D. Dissertation (unpublished),
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, 1993, chapter 11.
. Thapar, “Black Gold’, 13-15.
. Subrahmanian, Sangam Polity, 56, 214; Patirruppattu, w—Patikam;
vi—Patikam and vii—Patikam.
. Suresh, ‘A Study of the Roman Coins’, chapter 1.
See Kodumanal in the section on urban centres.
. Indian Archaeology: A Review (hereafter IAR), 1961-2: 26-7;
1964-5: 25; 1963-4: 20.
. R. Krishnamurthy, ‘Sangam Period Silver Coin with a Portrait
and a Legend’, paper presented at the First Oriental Numismatic
Congress, Nagpur, 1990b; idem ‘Makkotai Coins’, in Studies in
South Indian Coins, 1992, vol. 2, 89-93.
Reported in IRNS Newsline; Krishnamurthy, ‘Sangam Period
Coin Found’, News item, The Hindu, 24 May 1994.
. Reported in The Hindu, 6 Nov. 1987.
. Krishnamurthy, Pandtyar Peruvaluti Nanayangal, Madras, 1987.
. Krishnamurthy, Sanga Kala Malaiyaman Nanayangal, Madras,
1990a; R. Nagaswamy, Tamil Coins, A Study, Tamil Nadu State
Department of Archaeology, Madras, 1981, 140-2.
. Subrahmanian, Sangam Polity, revised edition, Madurai, 1980,
Lodi
. P.L. Gupta, “A Bibliography of the Hoards of Punch-marked
Coins of Ancient India’, Journal of the Numismatic Society of India,
vol. xv, 15-19.
. Maloney, “Archaeology in South India’, 19-20.
. T.G, Aravamuthan, ‘A Pandyan Issue of Punch-marked Coins’,
Journal of the Numismatic Society of India, 1944, vol. vi, part 1, 2n.
100. Periplus: 49.
101. Warmington, Commerce, 278.
102. Seneviratne, ‘Social Base of Early Buddhism in South East India
and Sri Lanka: sc 3rd Century to 3rd Century ap’, Ph.D.
Stimulus from Outside / 147
Dissertation (unpublished), Jawaharlal Nehru University, New
Delhi, 1987.
103. Potsherds and seals discovered at Kantarodai and Anaikkodai
in Jaffna district and other places. The close similarity of the
symbols with those of Kodumanal potsherds, and of the Alagar-
malai, Kongarpuliyangulam symbols show that the use of graffiti
and Brahmi script side by side was common in both the regions.
Mahadevan, ‘Ancient Tami] Contacts Abroad: Recent Epigraphic
Evidence’ Reverend Fr. X.S. Thani Nayagam Memorial Lecture,
Thani Nayagam Foundation Trust, Colombo, 8 Sep. 1994 (to
be published).
104. S. Paranavitana, /nscriptions of Ceylon, vol. 1, Early Brahmi Inscrip-
tions, Archaeological Survey of Ceylon, Colombo, 1970; also
Seneviratne, ‘Social Base’.
105. E.g. Ilakutumbikan in the Tirupparankunram Brahmi Inscrip-
tion: See Mahadevan, ‘Corpus’, 1968.
106. Mahadevan, ‘An Old Sinhalese Inscription from Arikamedu’,
Seminar on Epigraphy, Kuppuswami Sastri Birth Centenary, Madras,
1981b.
107. Maloney, ‘Early Coastal Sea Traffic’.
108. Suresh, ‘Roman Coins’.
109. McCrindle, Commerce and Navigation; idem Ancient India as
Described by Ptolemy, A fascimile reprint ed. by Surendranath
Majumdar and Chukkerverthy Chatterjee, Calcutta, 1927.
110. Pan Kou, a Chinese writer of the first century ap in his 7s’ten
han Chou, refers to the sea voyage from China to Houng-tche
(Kafici) in the period of emperor Wou (140-86 sc) and the
journey being covered in about ten months. It is historically
possible that China had relations with Kafici, as mention 1s
made of the goods that were brought as presents during the first
century AD, and goods that were asked for as ‘tribute’ by the
Chinese. See K.A. Nilakanta Sastri, Foreign Notices of South India,
University of Madras, 1972, reprint, 44-5.
111. See Section on Urban Centres—Kaverippumpattinam.
112. Manimekalai, xiv, xv, xxi, xxv and xxvii.
ae Mahadevan, ‘Ancient Tamil Contacts’; P. Shanmugam, ‘Tamil
Nadum Thailandum Todarpugal’, in Avanam, July 1993, no. 3,
81-4.
114. See Ray, Life and Art, Chatterjee, ‘Early Andhra’.
115. Periplus: 60.
116. Akananuru, 110: 18; 152: 7; Ainkurunuru, 192: 2; Purananuru, 13:
5; 26: 2; 30: 12-13 etc.; Maduraikkanci, 1. 83; 321; Narrinai, 295:
148 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
6; Pattinappalai, \. 174; Perumpanarruppatai, 1. 321. The reference
to a Mahanavika (Navigator) as a donor in the Buddhist centre
of Amaravati and the ‘ship’ type coins of the Satavahanas (ship
with one or two masts with a double set of rigging on each)
(Maloney, ‘Early Coastal Sea Traffic’, 153) leave no room for
doubt regarding the natives embarking on sea voyages.
H- ‘Pegs driven to tie strong boats (pahrz) that stand like steeds
in a stable tied. They, come fully laden with grain by barter
brought of salt refined’. Pattinappalai, ||. 28-32; Chelliah,
Pattuppattu, 31.
118. See Thapar, ‘Black Gold’, 8-9; Mahadevan, ‘Ancient Tamil
Contacts’.
ITY D. Devakunjari, Madurai Through the Ages, From the Earliest Times
to AD 1801, Society for Archaeological, Historical and Epigraphi-
cal Research, Madras, 1979 (?), chapter m1.
120. Purananim, 66: 1-3.
127i Nagaswamy, 7amil Coins, S.
122. Ibid.
123. Purananuru, 5 Colophon; Il, 32 etc., Palamoli Nanuru, 62: 1.
124. Purananum, 372; 24; Silappadikaram, xxv: 9, 34.
125. Akananuru, 93: 2; Purananuru, 36: 5; Silappadikaram, xxvu: 231;
xxvil: 126; xxix: Valttu: 7.
126. Sesha Aiyar, Cére Kings of the Sangam Period.
127. See for different views, P. Ramalingam, Karuvurée Varct, Madras,
Fis
128. See Pillay, A Social History of the Tamils, 269.
129. See Nagaswamy, ‘Karuvur-Vanyi, the Capital of the Sangam Ceéras’,
Journal of Kerala Studies, Dec. 1974, vol. 1, part 1v, 395-402.
130. Initial Report, The Hindu, 26 June 1973. Amphora fragments,
Kaolin Ware, Russet coated painted ware have also been reported
in the area, especially from Vellalir.
Ide Suresh, ‘Early Archaeological Finds in Karur’, paper presented
at the Indian History Congress, 52nd Session, New Delhi, 1992.
132. K.V. Raman, ‘Roman Jewellery and Coins from Karur’, The
Hindu, Sunday, 14 March 1993.
Las Mahadevan, ‘Corpus’, no. 66.
134. Raman, ‘Sangam Cera Coin Found’, The Hindu, fourteenth
March 1993.
135. Mahadevan, ‘Corpus’, nos 56-7.
136. Manimekalai, xxv, 122-31.
137, Ibid., xxvit: 69-72; xxvi: 55; Silappadikaram, x: 13-14; xxv: 92-3.
Stimulus from Outside / 149
138. Romila Thapar suggests that Huien Tsang’s informants may
have tried to impress the Chinese pilgrim with the antiquity
and importance of the places he visited by associating them with
Asoka. Huien Tsang does refer to the existence of Asokan stupas
in Kanci. See Thapar, Asoka and the Decline of the Mauryas, OUP,
1973, 2nd edn, 133.
139. Manimekalai, xxvii: 156-7; T.N. Vasudeva Rao, Buddhism in the
Tamil Country, Chidambaram, 1979, 113.
140. Muziris was, according to Pliny, the first emporium of India—See
Sesha Atyar, Céra Kings, 91; Nagaswamy, Tamil Coins, 7.
141. “.. . Céra’s great river Culli splashes with white foam where
Yavanas bring their well built ships
arriving with gold and carrying off pepper
from prosperous Muciri, reverberating with the Ocean.’
Akananumu: 149: 7-11.
142. Periplus: 54; McCrindle, Commerce and Navigation, 132-3.
143. Sastri, Foreign Notices, 1972, reprint, 53.
144. Periplus: 56; Sastri, Foreign Notices, 57-8.
145. Mahadevan, ‘Ancient Tamil Contacts’; K. Rajan, ‘Muciri-
Turaimukam. Cila Putiya Ceitigal’, in Avanam, Jan. 1994,
107-10.
146. Thapar, ‘Black Gold’, 25.
147. See Devakunjari, Madurai, 44ff.
148. Maduratkkanc, \\. 331-669.
Netunalvatai, \\. 31-5; 81-97; 101-5.
149.
150. Maduraikkanci, \\. 316; 411; 504-6; 512-13. Netunalvatai, |. 110;
also Ainkurunuru, 194: |; Kuruntokat, 189; 365: 1.
151. Maloney, “The Beginnings of Civilization’, 605-6.
152. Nagaswamy, Jamil Coins, 75.
153. Aravamuthan, ‘A Pandyan Issue’.
154. Krishnamurthy, Report in The Hindu, 1987.
155. Korkai is said to be the port of the Pandya ruler Valuti of
beautiful chariots and the ‘capital’ of Verrivel Celiyan—See R.
Nagaswamy, ‘Korkai Excavations’, Damilica, Dec. 1970, 1, 50-2.
156. R. Caldwell, ‘Sepulchral Urns in Southern India’, Indian Antr-
quary, 1887, 81-3 and Nagaswamy, ‘Korkai Excavations’, 5Off.
157. In ZAR, 1969-70, the R.C. date is given as 805 Bc, while the
report of the excavations in Damilica, 1, gives the date 785 Bc.
A sequence of three periods has been marked in Korkai:
Period 1—Urn burials with Megalithic BRW and Red Ware;
Period n—What is called the Pandya period (?) with Red Ware,
Sawed conches, terracotta beads, spouted potsherds;
150 / Trade, Ideology and. Urbanization
Period 11—Red Ware and Black Ware of a coarse variety—called
post-Pandya period (?).
. Akananuru, 27: 9; 350: 13; Ainkurunuru, 185: 1; 188: 2; Mani-
mekalai, xi: 84.
. Akananuru, 366: 5.
. Periplus: 59; Nilakanta Sastri, Foreign Notices, 59.
_ McCrindle, Commerce and Navigation, 141; The Peutingarian
Tables refer to it as Colchis Indorum. Ibid.
. Akananuru, 27; Maduraikkana, 134, 138; Narrinai, 25!
. Maloney, ‘The Beginnings of Civilization’, 605. Pandyakavata
(Kapatapuram of legend), Tamraparni (the river or Sri Lanka),
Koti (Dhanushkoti on the Vaigai delta) Curni (perhaps Manner
in northern Ceylon) Pasika (a port on the Vaigai mouth) etc.
. Silappadikaram, Uraiperukatturat, 4, x: 248; xi: 11.
. Akananuru, 122: 21.
. Pattinappalai, 1. 285; Cirupanarruppatai, \. 83.
. TAR, 1964-5; 1965-6.
8. The excavators assigned this cultural deposit to a period between
third century sc and first to second centuries ap, LAR, 1964-5,
25. In a subsequent report, they have given a different time
bracket, i.e. first century Bc to fourth century ap, LAR, 1965-6,
para 37. Similarly, period 11 has been pushed to 4th-7th centuries
AD from 2nd-5th centuries ab.
169. There is an earlier literary tradition about floods in the Kaveri.
Akananuru, 376: 4.
170. Mahadevan, ‘Corpus’, no. 68; also Appendix I, no. 10. This is
a rather damaged Brahmi inscription found in the cavern on
the Tiruchirapalli rock, and js assigned to about 3rd-4th cen-
turies AD. The reading ‘Cenkayipan’ is admittedly doubtful.
171. McCrindle, Commerce and Navigation, 142.
172. Shrines (Kottam) of Kama (Cupid), Sun, Moon, Indra, Balarama
and Niganthas, the guardian deity of the market place, 1.e. the
Catukkattu Batam, Sattan a folk deity, who had a shrine outside
the city. (Silappadikaram, v: 128; 1x: 23; xxv: 147; Manimekalai,
vil: 78)—Buddhist and Jain shrines and monasteries, of which
one was called the Indra vihara. (Silappadikaram, x: 14; xxv: 92;
xxviii: 70; Manimeékalai, xxvi: 55).
173. Puhar—Akananuru, 110: 4; Purananuru, 30: 12; Patirruppattu, 73:
9; Pattinappalai, 173; Silappadikaram, xv, Manimeékalai, v: 109;
Kakandi—Manimekalai, xx: 37. A Barhut inscription refers to
Kakandi, 1.c. Puhar. See Mahadevan, ‘Identification of Kakandi
in Bharhut Inscriptions’ paper presented at the International
Stimulus from Outside / 151
Seminar on Tamil Buddhism, Institute of Asian Studies, Madras,
May 1992. Sampapati—Manimekalai, Patikam: 8, 13.
174. Manimekalai, vi, 26: 37; xx: 63; 68.
175. TAR, 1962-3, 13.
176. Manimékalai, 1: 72; : 45; xix: 54; Silappadikadram, v: 117; 213; vi:
127; x: 31.
177. Pattinappalai, 11. 40-50; 59-74; 116-71; 183-212; 213-18.
178. Akananuru, 73: 10; Silappadikaram, v: 63; 196.
179. Manimekalai, xx: 2, 91 etc.; Silappadikaram, m 12.
180. TAR, 1962-3, 13. Kalimeaning backwaters (Subrahmanian, Pre
Pallavan Tamil Index, Madras, 1966) and Anai—meaning wooden
peg (Pattinappalai, \\. 29ff) probably indicate the area where the
boats were anchored.
181. The Pattinappalai refers to large boats (pahri) which carried white
salt and returned laden with paddy in exchange (IJ. 29-32). Great
ships are said to have sailed straight into the harbour of Puhar
without slacking sail, a description that does not apply to any
site of the present day in the mouth of the delta on account of
changes in the course of the Kaveri river and the shape of the
sea board.
182. See Subrahmanian, Pre-Pallavan Tamil Index, 105.
183. Surveys conducted by the Tamil Nadu Department of Archaeol-
ogy jointly with the National Institute of Oceanography, Goa,
are reported to indicate the remains of structures under water
about 4.5 kilometres (?) from the shore, apart from evidence of
a late eighteenth century shipwreck. No detailed report or results
are so far available. See Natana Kasinathan, Under Sea Explorations
off the Shore of Poompuhar, Department of Archaeology, Tamil
Nadu, 1991, 1-6.
184. TAR, 1963-4, 20.
185. TAR, 1964-5, para 42; 1965-6, para 35.
186. TAR, 1963-4, 20.
187. Nagaswamy, 7amil Coins, A Study, 1981, 134.
188. This Manigramam is believed to have later moved to the
Pandya country on the invitation of a Pandya king. Interestingly,
the Nattukkottai Chettiars and the Chettis of Tiruchirapalli
claim that their ancestors originally belonged to Kaverippum-
pattinam.
189, The concept of the ‘Gateway City’ is discussed by Burghardt in
‘A Hypothesis About Gateway Cities’, Annals of the Association
of Geographers, vol. xi, 1971. Such cities have a ‘dendritic network’
152 J Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
which Puhar does not seem to have had. On the other hand,
Puhar may be an ‘exchange gateway’, where ‘there is mature
exchange of products in one or more directions’. See J. Bird,
Centrality and Cities, Routledge, 1977, 119.
190. T.V. Mahalingam, Kdaficipuram in Early South Indian History,
Bombay, 1969, 19.
191. Perumpanarruppatai, 420; Manimékalat, Patikam, 90; xxvii. Head-
ing and subheading 152; xx: 148; 154; 174; Narrinai, 144, 213;
266; Kuruntokai, 10: 4; 30: 172.
192. IAR, 1962-3, 12ff, and relevant plates; 1969-70, 34ff. A later
excavation was conducted in the Varadarajasvami temple com-
plex.
The periodization proposed on the basis of the Kaficipuram
excavations has generally been uncertain and confusing. On the
basis of pottery finds a slightly different periodization has been
attempted varying from the one given by the excavations.
Period J[A—3rd century Bc to Ist century BC.
Period IB—Ist century Bc to 3rd century aD.
Period I]—3rd century aD to 7th century aD.
Period IJI—8th century ap to 13th century ap.
See P. Arasu, “Ancient Ceramic Industry from Kancipuram
Excavations’, M.Phil Dissertation (unpublished), University of
Madras, 1979; also K.V. Raman, ‘Archaeological Excavations in
Kancipuram’, Tamil Civilization, v, nos 1 & 2, 61-2.
193. TAR, 1969-70, 34f.
194, Curiously the same structure is assigned to 2nd-Ist centuries BC
in a subsequent report pointing to a confusion. See JAR, 1970-1,
para 50.
195. T. Walters, On Yuan Chuang’s Travels in India, 1905, vol. u, 226f.
196. Mahalingam, Kavcipuram, 74-5.
197, Mahadevan, ‘Corpus’, no. 71—-Mamandur and no. 76—Tiruna-
tharkunru; The Lokavibhaga was a translation into Sanskrit of
an earlier Prakrit work and is dated in the reign of Pallava
Simhavarman oft he fifth century ap Pallank6éyil Copper Plates—
T.N. Subramanian, ‘Pallankovil Jaina Copper Plate Grant of the
Early Pallavas’, Transactions of the Archaeological Society of South
India, 1958-9, 41-83.
198. Perumpanarruppatai, \\. 371-6; 405ff.
199, Nilakanta Sastri, Foreign Notices, 44-5.
200. Suresh, ‘Roman Vestiges in Kancipuram’, in Nandita Krishna
(ed.), Kanchi-A Heritage of Art and Religion, C.P. Ramaswami
Atyar Institute of Indological Research, Madras, 1992, 56-61.
Stimulus from Outside “4 153
201. IAR, 1970-1, 33; Nagaswamy, ‘Archaeology and Epigraphy’,
Proceedings of the Third International Conference Seminar, Tamil
Studies, Pondichery, 1973, 60; also Nagaswamy and Abdul
Majeed, Vasavasamudram (Report on the Excavations conducted
in the year 1970), Tamil Nadu Department of Archaeology,
Madras, 1978.
202. Nagaswamy, and Abdul Majeed, Vasavasamudram, 3-4.
203. Perumpanarruppatai, \\. 319-27; 346-51.
204. U.V. Swaminatha Iyer quoted in Subrahmanian, Pre-Pallavan
Tamil Index, 501; P.V. Somasundaranar (ed.), Perumpanarru-
ppatat, SISSW, 1967, ll. 319-27.
205. Selur, Salur or Salour (Delur) in Ptolemy’s Geographia. See War-
mington, 7he Commerce Between the Roman Empire and India,
Delhi, 1971, 62.
206. A. Abdul Majeed, D. Thulasiraman and S. Vasanthi, Ala-
gankulam, A Preliminary Report, Tamil Nadu Department of
Archaeology, 1992, chapter tv (General Editor-Natana
Kasinathan).
207. Nagaswamy, ‘Alagankulam, An Indo-Roman Trading Port’, C.
Margabandhu et al. (eds), /ndian Archaeological Heritage (K.V.
Soundararajan Felicitation Volume), Delhi, 1991, vol. 1, 247-54.
208. Akananuru, 18-20: 220.
209. Maduratkkanct, \\. 77-88.
210. R.E.M. Wheeler, A. Ghosh and Krishna Deva, ‘Arikamedu: An
Indo-Roman Trading Station’, Ancient India, July 1946, no. 2,
17-124.
211. See Vimala Begley, ‘Arikamedu Reconsidered’, American Journal
of Archaeology, 1983, 87, 461-81; also idem ‘Ceramic Evidence
for Pre-Periplus Trade on the Indian Coasts’, in Vimala Begley
and Richard Daniel de Puma (eds), Rome and India. The Ancient
Sea Trade, The University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, 1991,
176-96.
212. Akananuru, 206: 13-14; Narrinat, v: 58. See Mahadevan, ‘The
Ancient Name of Arikamedu’, Subrahmanian (ed.), Surya
Narayana Sastri Centenary Volume, Madurai, 1970, 204 ff.
Zid Mahadevan, ‘Arikamedu Graffiti: A Second Look’, Damilica, 11,
Madras, 1973, 62ff.
214. Champakalakshmi, ‘Archaeology and Tamil Literary Tradition’,
110-22.
215. For Podikai see Subrahmanian, Pre-Pallavan Tamil Index.
216. Mahadevan, ‘An Old Sinhalese Inscription from Arikamedu’,
154 4 Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Seminar on Epigraphy, Kuppuswamy Sastri Birth Centenary, Madras,
1981b (Sanskrit College).
217. I am grateful to Prof. Y. Subbarayalu for making available to
me an interim report of the excavations in Kodumanal! in
several seasons—1986 and 1988-90. This report provides an
integrated picture of the entire site and its archaeological
material.
218. Kodumanam is praised for its ubiquitous jewel stones, particu-
larly rock-crystal (palinku) in the Patirruppattu. Coral, onyx,
amethyst, sapphire, agate, garnet, jasper, beryl, moonstone and
crystal are found in this site. See K. Rajan, ‘Iron and Gem Stone
Industries as Revealed from Kodumanal Excavations’, Puratattva,
1989-90, no. 20, 111-12.
219. B.B. Lal, “From the Megalithic to the Harappa: Tracing Back
the Graffiti on Pottery’, Ancient India, 1962, no. 16, 4-24.
Leshnik, The South Indian Megalithic Burials: The Pandukal Com-
plex, Wiesbaden, 1974. i
220. Arumuga Sitaraman, ‘Kuriyittu Modiram’, Avanam, 4, Jan. 1994,
86-7. One of them is probably a rolling seal.
et. Jambai inscription—from a personal visit to the site and the
estampage taken of the inscription.
bed. Purananum, 99.
223. Purananum, 101.
224. Reported in Dinamalar, 5 Oct. 1992. The village is Soraiyappattu
Madurakkéttam.
225. R. Krishnamurthy, Sanga Kala Malatyaman Nanayangal, Madras,
1990.
226. Periplus: 53; Nilakanta Sastri, Foreign Notices, 56-7.
227. Periplus: 53 and 54; Nilakanta Sastri, Foreign Notices, 57; Mc-
Crindle, 134.
228. McCrindle, Commerce and Navigation, 111-12 and 131.
229. Nilakanta Sastri, Foreign Notices, 58; Cf. Manimeékalai, xm: 5-7.
230. Bammala of Ptolemy? (vm: 1: 9); McCrindle, Ancient India as
Prescribed by Ptolemy, 139.
fol. Periplus: 59; Nilakanta Sastri, Foreign Notices, 59.
232. McCrindle, Ancient India, 140-2; The place called Cirni referred
to in the Arthasastra has been identified with Mannar.
See Maloney, ‘The Beginnings of Civilization’, 605.
Z2J. Maloney, “Early Coastal Sea Traffic’.
234. McCrindle, Ancient India, 142.
235. Maloney, ‘Beginnings of Civilisation . . .’, 605.
Stimulus from Outside if 155
236. Periplus: 61; Nilakanta Sastri, Foreign Notices, 49-50; McCrindle,
Commerce and Navigation, 143-4; also Taprobane and Salica—
Periplus of the Outer Sea by Marcian of Heraclea in W.H. Schoff,
Philadelphia, 1977, 17-18; 24-5.
237. Periplus: 60; Nilakanta Sastri, Foreign Notices, 59.
156 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
TAMILAKAM
Early Historical Urban Centres
300 B.C - 300 A.D.
|
BENGAL -
@ Laccadive
Legend
ROYAL CENTRE
CHIEFLY CENTRE): -~-
PORT .- ;
COASTAL TOWN
CRAFT CENTRE
ROMAN COINS | Hoards }
ROMAN COINS | Surface }
ROMAN COINS [ Excavated |
PUNCH MARKED COINS:
TAMIL BRAHMI INSCRIPTIONS
LOCAL COINS P+LP TO#®ODeOp
TRADE ROUTE
INDIAN
Map 1: Urban Centres - Early Historical Tamilakam
Stimulus from Outside y. 157
Appendices
Bach Maske een Finds i Eeenlakem
Site District Metal (Silver)
(in numbers)
Alampalayam Coimbatore Silver 63 numbers
Bodinaikkantr Madurai Silver 1138 numbers
Chavadipalayam Coimbatore Silver exact number
not known
Coimbatore Coimbatore Silver 3 numbers
Coimbatore Coimbatore Silver large number
Eyyal Cochin Silver 12 numbers
Kauniakuttai Salem Silver 17 numbers
Kolattur Tiruchirapalli Silver 346 numbers
Mambalam In Madras City Silver 807 numbers
Nedumangalam Ramanathapuram Silver 212 numbers
Pennar Coimbatore Silver a potful
Thayirapalayam Coimbatore Silver 193 numbers
Tondamanathan South Arcot Silver 27 numbers
Vembavur Tiruchirapalli Silver 991 numbers
Vembavur Tiruchirapalli Silver 1375 numbers
Virasikhamani Tirunelveli Silver 287 numbers
* Information supplied by the Director, Government Museum, Madras and
also based on P.L. Gupta, ‘A Bibliography of Punch-Marked Coins of Ancient
India’, Journal of the Numismatic Society of India, vol. XVUl, and R. Vanaja, The
Madras Museum Collection of PunchMarked Coins, A Study, M.Litt. Thesis
(unpublished), University of Madras, 1955.
S
u
r
f
p
a
v
v
o
s
y
(
v 1 9
a y U v A ] 1 S
)
U V U V é
s s a m s Z € 6 9 € 6 Z 0 C L ¢
s I
]
G
p
w
r S
e
y e p u r e L
®
u
i d f o ‘ o N o £ i s n j s n 3 n y : S N I I I G I y " S Y 8 6 E T i s n y s n 3 n y : s N I I I Q I € Z
2 g
s n y s n 3 n y “ S N I I Q I T “ s n e s é
s s q s s 9 1 2 1
p u r q u r
o
p r e o y y “
]
7 1 4 1 5 1 q 0 y e q U u I T O ! ) 0 } e Q U I T O T ) 0 } q Q U I I O D ) i e A l s a q ( p o r g )
7
)
u
e
u
r 1 e
o y y
y n J w
T j v ] o d r e i
e n
T y d
“
g
y
I
e u
m
e
e
e T J O g n p r ) u q
w
e
a i
S n w
M p d e w e y e i
O p j n
N ] u e e u d u
[ i I e
m v ] u y y p n g u q
" | 7 ¢ ‘ p b
D
O
I
U
S
é
OV(
I
U
)
PY
A
‘
)
D
I
P
(
V
A
UV AV
y
woonrOFe *: a N = NN
[ n d i p u i q £ 9 u u y )
‘ S N I I Q I ‘ s n i p n e y s
e
[ O U 2 N
l o
‘ s n e s
e
‘ u R T T W O G g " P A J I N
1
S 8 2 y
2 1 0 ) e q u I I O
Z
)
(4
s u e d t q n
d
O I
+
A t l a g
‘ s m y s n 3 n y
“
2
I p a a j a u n a t y
: 0 1 2 N s u e i s e d s a , ‘ u e N n I W O G g s U R L I p e p y
j e d e s r y
o
n a r y S p- a i p u n y y i s n y s n 3 n y
r e
( r
s
u
e
q yy
y oe
r
e e[ r
u
e e
d r
g i n e u y
e e sY
e w I e
d e
p
A
L
r u r y e w 0 y A W I E / P m i r y
u P
8 U
2 P
y e
d
U P
p
e r P
r w [
d N |
e I
u
w
d y y
e e r
i
n j
A
e | [
20
8 u
T k1
r
e U
w
e
y
r
i
n
i
6
%
&
]
yr
yu
ps
s
o
o
v
a
p
U
UV YV V AV
LZ
06 mon
y
n
3 ]
0 0 q S y s n j s
n
S N I I I
Q I
isn ‘ y S s N n L 3 I n Q y L y i sn “ j S s N n U 3 I n Q y U ] ‘ snipne ‘ y U s R T}IWOG
o “
n 9 OJ3N
3
8
Se
f“[SSGLMoouDAaN tMSy oSsT €€7 Il SI
T
C
E
S
S y
I p
D e
d
e
s
r
y e
o A u
n l r
s r l a a y e TeInpeyy
y g s
w
As ay d e
e i
i n
n d
i e
e I
u n
q v
g (
i ¢
pa )
1 S
u o y y w u u r W i e g [ [ } H
r Z r
s p r e o m U E Y y I E u 2 u 0 e a n p e
H y y ~
y
6
" |
* q
“ 9 «
O T
I
]
“
Z I
V
U
UV UV AV AV
“-
y
n
3
n
s
y isnysn3ny isnipnelD
n
s
i
s n ‘OJ2N u y 2 Y
I I y s n 3 n y + 9 ‘sm‘a
o
y y n p n g SsNnL3In1Iy0G SI T ‘SNU‘IsQnIe]s suei8s9ed s + £ 6 1 0 a1 2 N A ‘ s n i g s n t u o j S
n
e
r
A 2 2 J O
I 4 4 D
D 0 0 I
1
2
,
e
Y
s q q
e U U Y
a I I I
p 1 T N
e O O O
y F D S
y ) )
i
n
j
i
d
1 o
y y
> y
e r
T Ipnguery t
O y
d
(
t
y
s
H
N
ry n
w e- j
e ye j
[ oP e
e q U u U r y r e u u a 1 y e f [ O y N p N d y N I e Y ) d e A t 0 s
| g d
T
E p “ O LI
l S T T
Ca
P
u
r
y
p
aad)
v
v
Wu v
(
o
s
y L
¢
j V V
v U A
i
a A
y yV
IE 1€
EZ 82 I
s I€ II S8 ¢S . 66 88 ¢
a
n
s
] y y y
n n n e
< p s u i o y fo'onNp
9
i s n y s n 3 s n g : s n i p n e : O 1 2 N
V
E
Q
W C C T S O D i s n j s n 3 L O A L L S O : s n i e s y ( 2 c o s a s h i c a o
#
Q
L
U
p S I $ T O 7 ) ‘ s n y s n 3 ‘ S N U a q h y : s n i e s y “ S n I p H O J 9 N
= O - 0 }
— F 1
3 S 2
a0
5
d
iI
D
O
A
T
E
V )
y O 1 0
n M )2
] 0 o
] i
a
=
q 8quII
eS
p E
i u o D s a i g e e E U T E T E I n j e l j P A D I F I P A I N [ e i j 2 A
p P
r O
e O
o L
y
6
1
‘ | B i “
®
“
9
°
- g B l E
<<2zszszz
AV
r y q S I
I
é ¢ é +
1
é ¢ a y L b wo weOUOU NOM
u d
1 + ) € Z y o n y s u n ( s
q
i s n y s n 3 n y R I O ] Z ) s n i z o q h L R 0 3 d n ) ( O 1 2 x Y a r a , S P I O s u e d t i q
n
‘ s n y s n 3 n y o m o a a t t ‘ s n i p n e y > ‘ s n i p n e y s : 0 1 2 N O 1 2 N
1 7 " 8 2 é Q U I T O I O ] € 8 PA a Ep a g
P
I T 2O170 )} e 1 0 J D s a y y y o u y
U j N
q y n
P a
y
e
2 1 0 Q U I T
2O1?0)}
p e d
e
y y
V P
e
G
U
I
I
O
D
f
a
d
d r
a A
t d
y
I6N]T ETYPA “IPN6[lE T2A “ “
0 1
z 7
i
s
S pP
u
l
e
]
p
a
v (
v a
oM
v
s
sM
A
V
y +
)
[ AV
P
W UV AV
R
I b v
I
s
a
n
s
s
] s
e n
L ‘ ‘ t
p s t a s n i s n i p I
S
u
m (
s :
g g n
y
t o f o ‘ O N s u e l e l y : 1 S 2 Y s o o o t i s n j s n 3 n y : s M I I I Q L y A y U 0 l e y { ) n i s a q i j y o i s l e s : s n i p n e y D : 0 J 9 N S E [ [ E I e I E D ) s n i u o j u y 6 : u e L I p e H s n i u o j u y s n o I e W
a
w
pA s e
u s s 1 o u [ n
i R y
q U e
e U u
r l
m D y
)
b a
l
a o
bs d o
c
|
w
e
u
r
n h A
e r
} u
} r
0 y
y
s
i
p a
,
i
4 w
o
D e
w e
e
q
s p k e u
i i n
e 0 y
o
p y
{
p
1
1 H €
a 1 2 o D “ Z Z Z
V
A
AdV AV
o
s
y y
+ T v ) s a n s s t a y
e p -
s n (i Js o p o s y y S n I s‘ ] o] p o s y
+1
1 8 9 ] of i s n y s n 3 n y ( O 1 2 N c u e i s e d s a , w e e r ‘ U P T I W I O G " P A I O N s u e l e l y s u e L p e p y y s n i u o j‘ us nyi g s n o s e y y ‘ S N I a
I N
s u e i s e d s a , s n i u o j‘ us nyi g
0
S |
s
y
| u@+S Z SI
e ]
s
y y
n r
N d e l s p u
I w
T y
o u
u i p
r
u
5 g
y i e
s s
u v
s m a
e m
u
n
i
N
O
Y
d
n
i ]
u e
y
e a U r l
s
y j p
r n Y
n a e a E
y P
y U
A
w
7 7 Z 7
“ ° ¢ 9
e
N
I
yM
sP
s‘
o
i
v
a
P
y
=
a
v
V
U
y
s s y
— S u a
n
I O I
7 )
y 9
9 7
6
9 2
8
1
I r d
d i
a
I é
i< 0p D P O U I W q n d a 3 n y ( e u y
o n y f o s u : “ S N 1 L u e s t : p o l a g ‘ s n j s n S H I ‘ s n e s y a m ) U B L I P e p Y " S I Y E Y E [ T W E ]
‘ Z U
"
L
T
S
U
D
yI
lU
u
p
S
D
O
I
U
Y
O
W
L
1 U
7
x "
7
o D
I
u
s
‘
Y
O
W
E
R
U
g
n
i
a
s
" ) o s
y
e y 1
“ Y
o p y
p . 4 4
0
a u s
a r p u
r w y d
n
d i a
p e y s
y
S u
p e a
r
U IW
OOlJ“1SUjs ]
i e l N P
s p U O
‘ | L Z
g “
-
,
S
P
U
l
y
P
A
v
V O (
o Wa
s dv
y )
=
v
a
y A y U V u v A V = o U U v
U
V
V
S
L A
M
4 é é Z 1 I I Z z
S
]
6
)
u
r S
e
U
y
e I ‘ s ‘
y O s S s s s“
r u r e i ‘ O N f o D 3 [ R I O ] M U a q i |£ N I Z O Q U L
I(I
M I p N e | > ) I n y s n 3 n y € n y s n 3 n y S N U I Q I y
WU
u ]O
l T
s
p u r q
u I 0 7 )
p u s s
i q
i n d
a y s u r y D
2 1 0 }
P Q U I T O T )
A r a
y o t p u o g s u I a y I N
2 4 0 }
2 q U I I O D
2 1 0 }
P Q U I T O * )
u
e
W w
o e
y y y
y n e
] j
r u w
e T e
‘ n y p
¢ p I e e l
e
y y
]
] O g
[
e d
e
i
e
d
u (
r w
e e
r j u
y e r
T p e
A s uu d
Y o me e
r e I n p o p e u r e j e d
i o d w e y e p e M e U y o w e y u y d o u s i g s e y p r ) ) i p e a e y y
=
* | 7 ¢ ‘ > = “ ‘ 9
S
U
S I
p u l ( O D
y y
o
q
y
p
a
p a v u n s s - ) s u r e s o j a s a U
o 2tiT
0 1ooY
s qggD
y
s
e
d
1 9 7 2 9
W
q v d o p ) C a e A V A V a v
u
U I
N
8 I I I v [ Z o n
S ep
S ] s y W a y
S p S U 1 0
" ) f o ‘ O N [ R I O ]
S U R
I U I U Z T e A , e I D O p N n y I
: s n
u e i u r y s n ( 6
i
s n y s n 3 n y ‘ S n O G T t L
“
T P A D
n i y j a i n y
s n o s e y ]
i s n i g s
n i u o j u y S O O T .
p u e
s u I n u a d
n u e p r i u
n s u r o s
«
=
y
y j e
j y 2 e d
9 1 4 4 S 1 q ] o o I y Y I N O S 1 0 } q U I T O Z ) d e s r y o n s r y e a r y o n s t y
y s
n i
j 2 o
v ] 1 0
] e
y e
q u m m
p i i i
p i r e
n D o d y y
p
. i w i r
u e
o d
y #
e
j
e
A g
e
x y g 4 i u r
¢ y
1 0 a e A
1
o r
a 3 " j j e p u r y i m m r
1 p e r y
N
G
n
g
y y
‘ ] = “
]
“ S 8
6 4
6
L
d
u
UV AV AV
) ~ ( q y p ) r u
y
~“ Yp qr )u
p
— d a y
V‘e(e n G
qAuu y q O
u e w r y s n n u I s O 3
9
I n ] u e
(
r n / p e y
n
p e y
n
i s n y s n 3
n
S N U I Q I T y ) s u e d
t
‘ U e n T
W
l
e s ‘ e i
s ) l
e y ]
e F
e € i
n+ d
Z t y u W O
g
s e y
q
I I |s,n isopo(4a y
O
W a e w
n u
u ( e
p d ]
l o g f p p
a p
u
n
I O g i n p
e y
l L e
A A r
e e
r I
S
U g
A y
e e
g F s
s o N d e
n U n
u I
p e i
i n W w e
e
r
y
o y
p T
A L | N
Y ]
e u m
n
e u Y
s I
y j e g
y u g N e
r e s r e j e l o y u I y r j r e AI ro
y m w
e
T
wredrreeijnepdenyyy ejny
T l
T C
‘0! ‘el bl |h e)
a
]
yl
SP
O
D
V
A
P
Y
I=
D
v V v
a A d
r
S
M
S U I6 0) D
S L
A
e s p o i p u n y y : s é n i J O U u O } y ‘ s n i p e o r y fr ‘ s é n i s e y s e u y e : S I N I s O p o a
y
2 J u J N I u r s u U 0
D
u U r W O Y u O é n e L f ‘ S | n i s Q p o s y y ] re fR ‘ u R T U U a eT
e
Fe e I D 0 p n y e FRe
N f
o
] y [
O
:
O eW
“ I
Z | I - y D A
,
r
u
s
y w y
j
a e e a
o p p d
f r
e I n
I
e I n
a
d y n
O y
t
s h
n o
u
e
u | y
s y
e r
P P L w e
r
p e W n d a p
3
u
n y
i
e
r
)
o y pe ~
u ew
p . t e u j e
q;
ee
yd
g dn
n ns
e ie
A e w
u s w (
a y y
¢ e y
e y
110
N
N e i
n
p
e n
p
e
a P r ) r
a
T
I S]
“ I IS
¢ g
4
“
Z |
“
8
:
Y
A
0
AV av dV ao. 4
0 n
s n ‘ i I s o p 1 o a y y ,
e
I e y ) S n i‘ s] e y s e u y I u o nj eo w y S N i Is ]o p o s y yZ 2 e ‘ |u N U I e } s U O
s
2 u °n Ju] e s I u o
D
s n u1s)o p o a y (y y1g
4
p a y n u a p r
u
U e n > P 0 I Q ] I
t
y s i a n s s ] “ y U 2 9 ‘ G V S I O N S S ] é
‘
O U I 7 I
O g ) I n a 91 Y I p
¢ t y e U W t I T O T I I s r y o sal: I
u n
a
(
u
e q
u
y e d
e
I e a p o 2 1 0 y A N I D
e
q Q u I T2 O1 Z0 )} m m a r ( u e y p J O O I
Y
r e
y
I n p e y y
T ) s e i p e y y o n a r y y y Y I N o S e w n s t
O y o u
n s u e n J P Q G U I T l e d e y y e d e s r n p t A w e y e s
l o u e T O e p e l e l u y I
r a
u m
t
a
N
e y e p y d e r e p | i t y
de ] n
ep r w
pi N e
id y y u
i n p nI dO s n j y n e y y e d e s r j i A o y w e p e s
u y n
l I
r
a
g g m y
o n r
t j j a
n o n n
I d I o
e
p
r
e
s
‘
61 ‘02 4B S 9
S
P
U
u
l
y
p
a
j
v
i
2
0
s
s
y
I
v I : é
a y y y d V U V U V a V U V A V U V A V
—
«
S
L
A
M
S
S
T
G
D
S
U
I u
f
0 ) e d
i
i s
n
:
S
‘ s
m
‘ s
n
‘ O N T
o
r a
S I
o n s s ] I
q n
d a y ¢
y s
n 3 n y
N I
Q I [ |
y s
n 3 n y I i I
i p
n e y > é
= s n
( U w W r ( 3 2 j s n
P e | 3
y 9 1 j S 8
1 q ]
s e
a
a
i t a
W W O g
e } } r y )
3 1 0 }
B Q U I T O 7 )
2 1 0
¥
}
Q U I I O 7 )
u r e
d d e s e y
T ] J - 2
P - 2 I N D )
2 1 0 }
& Q U I I O 7 )
n y
P P M P
2 1 0
U R U U r )
r
e
q
y j
n a
j r d
v ] e r e
p y
e e w I [
n n E
p H
s y I
) I S
p
.
1
u
0 y w
e
u
A n (
j 1
e s 1 0 2 9 e 5 1 N G a i < i n d d n i t j j o d j e u n p y n d d n u r u e d r e j j a A q e d u i n d d u s a r y W R A R P U I U E T T E A p r y n s n p n y e w e p l 0 0 y Z r y ) I N R
"
I = =
‘ _ * “ “ c E
- g L C “ g Z 6 Z O F T E e E
V
A
AV
n i s
o p o a
y
a s n
3 n y
s n 3
n y
I p N e
y e )
u o j‘
uS s yn i g
s I I ‘ s m s n y “ ‘ S M N ] s n i
( 9 O
? : O
J
‘O19NJ ‘ O
T
7
) | 1 ) N I é
4e
u
u
U
r
u
o
i
e ] ]
P P
M M
P P
yP P
e
y
s
i
e
g
y
o
e
A
e ]
w P
N
I
P
e P
Y
y
s
l
e
g
y
r
i
n
a
w e d r j j o
y
e p e y u r y y w e d e i i n ) ( e
]
y
e
e ( u o o g
u i
a
e
E
b
“ “Se t e4
3
‘LE
S
p
U
u
l
]
p
a
y (
v i O é
v W
0 s s d ) U V
p
=
v
l
a y A U
y V V
=
S +
L A
M
7 I I I
S
]
6
U r e y e y r U r e
7
‘ o f
N
o S u 1 ) 0 D
p
+ U P T U - ] N ] U S T E
A
‘ s n i p e s
y
n u s p i ‘ u p s o
)
y
T
s
‘ s n y s n 3 n
y
u W
r e
i
p n y
a J 9 1 4 d e y e d e
q 9 S 1 j e a r
T ] u y
— e o
w n
E
a
r
y y
iI|aeIt i_l Ite ak
r
a w
g e
e i
s n
’
7 y
d
e
< n u
| j V j
] e
¢ u
r s
w n
e i v
y y
y
s
j
e
y
os
wu
I
sO
2D
L y
A Y w e
j n
j 0
p u
p a
y x s
y ez
u e
e Z z e l y m r e P I P D J A N I S t a d d o y W - y P u n d
-
=O
‘ U - W
g ¢ A
V
V q
y
d
3
External Trade:
Evidence from Early Tamil Texts
CO) of the major categories of sources for the study of
early historic Tamil society and economy is the corpus
of Tamil literature known as the ‘Sangam’ literature. It is a
remarkable collection of poems containing evidence of early
South Indian trade with the West Asian and Mediterranean
regions and the Southeast Asian countries.
‘Sangam’ literature was not the product of a particular social
or religious group, nor was it sponsored as a court literature by
a ruling elite. It was also not intended to be a record of the
activities of any one group. Composed at various points of time
over a long span of about six hundred years, and authored by
people of various levels—princes, chieftains, peasants, merchants,
potters, smiths, carpenters and brahmanas, Jains and Buddhists,
the poems deal with disparate social groups. Yet, they admittedly
provide useful insights into the society and economy of the
early Tamils.
To use this corpus as a source of historical evidence, however,
clear perspectives on the nature of its poetry need to be evolved,
for it represents oral poetry of a heroic age. Being bardic
literature in praise of heroes and patrons, its concern with
various aspects of socitty and economy was incidental. Given
to conventional, stylized and symbolic language, its preoccupa-
tion with stock-phrases and stereotyped expressions makes
historical interpretation a hazardous exercise. The need for the
use of Semiotics to interpret the signs and symbols of this
heroic poetry has also been stressed in recent writings on early
Tamil society and economy. This apart, it defies all attempts
at an acceptable chronology, only relative chronologies based
on internal evidence being possible within the six hundred
years—300 Bc to aD 300—for which it serves as the source
material. Furthermore, the systematic collection of these poems
176 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
into anthologies, with invocatory verses and colophons, took
place several centuries after their composition (i.e. c 7th-8th
centuries AD) with the express object of attributing them to a
Tamil Sangam of great antiquity and providing them a legit-
imacy from the world view of the Puranic religions.
Pioneering works used the disparate references to trade, both
internal and external, centres of exchange, items of trade and
trading groups, as direct and collective evidence of a single
period and structure, as they did for other aspects of society
and economy in this period. To them, trade was an isolated
phenomenon, not necessarily to be discussed as a part of the
socio-economic processes. Much of their interpretation of the
‘Sangam’ poems was heavily dependent on the medieval com-
mentaries, themselves the product of a different social milieu.
The new approaches have adopted a more sophisticated
methodology derived from anthropological and ethnographic
studies for reconstructing what is generally understood to be a
‘tribal’ society in the process of transformation. Yet, what needs
to be emphasised is the fact that the evidence from the ‘Sangam’
works on trade is often impressionistic and quantitatively less
significant than on other aspects of society and economy. Hence,
it has been found necessary to situate the references in specific
contexts, geographic and ecological, and seek corroborative
evidence from other sources like classical accounts, epigraphic
records, albeit limited, and archaeological evidence, which, in
the Tamil region, is not as illuminating as in the Deccan, to
arrive at a more meaningful method of synthesising the data
on trade and its impact.
The classical accounts, 1.e. Graeco-Roman works, it must be
admitted, are significant both because they are datable and
because they provide us with valuable data on the Indo-Roman
trading network and on the ports, marts, exports and imports
of the Tamil country. As Maloney' points out, ‘the mundane
character of the Greek works causes them to be a useful sup-
plement to the Indian literary sources’.
The chronology of the Sangam works, on the other hand;
has for long been a keenly debated aspect of Tamil history.
Studies in the language and literary forms of these works have
made serious attempts to evolve a relative chronology and the
External Trade / 177
most satisfactory exercise is that of Kamil Zvelebil,? which has
been used in various studies on early historic society and
economy.
What the present essay is concerned with is to analyse the
data from this literature from the point of view of the develop-
mental processes of trade, its mechanism and organization and
the emergence of exchange networks in such early societies, as
a result of contact and interaction with the outside world. The
epics, Silappadikaram and Manimékalai, which belong to the
post-Sangam phase of early Tamil literary activities, also have a
very important bearing on early trade and hence are used in
this essay to understand the nature of this trade.
As mentioned earlier, the ‘Sangam’ works represent collec-
tions of oral poetry of a heroic age whose signs and symbols
need to be decoded through semiological methods. A contextual
application of this method has resulted in some meaningful
appraisals of the ecological basis of the socio-economic differen-
ces in the zones called tsmai—a concept which dominates the
poems and refers to a ‘situation’ which explains the different
socio-economic milieux. This approach has led to more success-
ful attempts to provide a basic understanding of the forms of
production and economic organization in these eco-zones and
the processes of change in some of them,’ pointing to at least
two broad phases of development: from a primitive and archaic
to a more advanced stage of farming, the latter phase also
marking an incipient urbanism, the processes of urbanization
showing that the impetus to the growth of urban centres in
certain finais or eco-zones (like marutam and neital) was provided
by maritime trade activities and interaction with foreign traders.‘
The concept of the tiai is in many important ways, a pointer
to the nature of early exchange between the subsistence level
production systems in these zones. How this inter-timai ex-
change? was later brought into a wider system of long distance
trade presents an interesting facet of the impact and ramt-
fications of the western trade with South India. The most fruitful
exercise would, hence, be an attempt to identify products of
different eco-zones which figure in inter-regional and western
trade, As a point of illustration, forest and hill products were
exchanged for the exotic—luxury items of western trade. To
178 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
locate their source or regions of origin and the nature of control
over them and their movement to the ports of export should
be an important concern of any study which seeks to understand
the links between inter-timai exchange and the wider trading
networks in this period.
Before the details of this symbiotic exchange between tinais
and the identification of the articles of trade coming from
different zones are taken up, it may be pointed out that the
nature of the evidence from the ‘Sangam’ works shows that the
trade contacts between the Roman empire and Tamilakam cannot
be discussed in isolation from the South Indian contacts with
the other parts of the South Asian region and with Southeast
Asia, all of which participated in these early commercial activities
linking the Mediterranean countries with the South Asia and far
eastern countries of Asia. Another point that needs to be stressed
is the fact that there are hardly any direct references in the
Sangam works to the Romans per se and Roman trade. These
works make no distinction between Greeks, Romans and West
Asians—all of whom were involved in this trade. The term Yavana,
which occurs in the context of foreigners and their trade activities,
refers to them in general. It also occurs in other contexts, as
referring to those Yavanas who were permanently settled in the
region as guards of palaces and royal camps, where the ruling
chief was guarded by the ‘fierce looking’ and brave ‘Yavanas’.
Being ignorant of the local tongue and having no local sym-
pathies they made ideal gatekeepers.® The Silappadikaram’ says
that, impressed by the stern discipline of the Yavana soldiers,
the Tamil kings employed them as guards of the fortress gates.
The more significant among the references to Yavanas are
those on their settlements in important trading and commercial
centres like Puhar and Muciri.’ That they were most likely
Romans is indirectly attested by the Roman pottery and other
associate finds in excavations. That such settlements or Yavana
suburbs are invariably found on the coast, especially in the big
emporia of trade, is no less important in understanding the
nature of their contact and interaction. The Yavanas would also
seem to have moved across important trade routes, as indicated
by the distribution of Roman coins and pottery in areas like
Pudukkottai and Coimbatore.
External Trade if 179
The Roman contact was an important factor in the external
trade of the Tamil country from about the times of Augustus
(27 Bc to aD 14), although a considerable antiquity has been
assigned to the commerce between the Tamil country and the
west.” It perhaps started as a mere ‘trickle’ or sporadic trade or
unscheduled exchange, and gradually became a fruitful com-
merce in which spices, pearls, gems, cotton fabrics and other
‘oriental’ exotics werz traded for Roman gold and wine and
other assorted articles for well over two centuries.'°
The Graeco-Roman ‘discovery’ of the secret of the monsoon
winds (Hippalos), a ‘discovery’ which was probably made pro-
gressively in successive stages, is believed to have introduced a
change or spurt in this activity. Traffic based on monsoon winds
could have become popular by early first century AD as it is
known to both Pliny and the Periplus. Thus, when hopping
coastal trade was replaced by direct sailing to the western coasts,
i.e. from Egypt to the ports of Kerala coast, these ports would
have become centres of direct trade with the west. More signi-
ficantly, this led to the establishment of Roman trading settle-
ments in a few Tamil ports. Hence, the South Indian ports
would seem to have become independent centres of trade ‘free
from Borygaza’s economic dominance’, i.e. the dominance of
the Gujarat coast, and even led to the dominance of the Malabar
ports, at least initially ‘over the commercial network’."!
It would seem that the foreign merchants maintained a force
of cohorts at Muziris (Muciri) to protect their trade.'* This ts
perhaps indirectly confirmed by the Patirruppattu, which refers
to a Céra king, Imayavaramban Neduncéralatan punishing the
Yavanas by binding ‘their hands behind them’ and ‘pouring ney
(ghee/clarified butter) on their head’ and ‘walking them along’."”
The Peutingerian tables mention Tyndis and Muziris and refer
to a temple of Augustus on the West coast.'* There is, however,
no reference to it in the Tamil sources.
The importance of the west coast, particularly Muziris (Mucir1)
as the main port of activity, is confirmed by the references in
the Akananuru and Purananuru, which are considered to be the
earliest poems. Subsequently, the shift in importance, however
gradual, to the Coromandel ports, particularly to Kaverippum-
pattinam or Puhar (Camara or Khaberis), 1s indicated by
180 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Ptolemy’s references of the second century AD and, more signi-
ficantly, by the Pattinappalai, of a date later than the Akam and
Puram collections, describing Puhar. The Coromandel ports
thence came to be the major links in the transit trade between
the Roman west, Southeast Asia and China. It may also be noted
that the transcontinental silk route linking China with the west
became inoperative due to the disturbances caused by the move-
ments of Parthians in Central Asia around the first century Bc.
Thus, many of the goods were being deflected to the Coromandel
ports through the Southeast Asian ports. For this, either Indian
or Malay vessels must have been used to transport the merchan-
dise from the Malacca straits to the Coromandel coast, from
where the Greek ships collected them.
It has been suggested that since Greek vessels called at the
various Tamil ports to carry back the trade goods, few Tamil
merchants and ships ventured west. The basic reason for Tamil
merchants not venturing or ‘pouring over the seas’ to the west
lies not so much in the logic of ‘western’ and ‘eastern’ minds,'*
as in that oft he terminal transit trading patterns, whereby Tamil
merchants organized the collection of goods from within the
country and from Southeast Asia and Sri Lanka, and Greek
shippers came over to collect and transport them. That the Céra
and Pandya regions were more directly involved in the terminal
trade, whereas the Cola region with its ports was concerned with
the transit trade linking the rest of the country with Rome, Sri
Lanka (Ilam) and Southeast Asia, is well attested by the Tamil
sources with its clues to the nature of goods coming from
different eco-zones (timai) and from Southeast Asia.
There are some interesting clues to the seafaring instincts of
the Tamils in this early period. The Puram refers to a Pandya
prince who was drowned in the sea (Kadalul Mainta Ilam
Peruvaludi).'® A Cola ruler who plied a ‘fleet’ across the seas
and controlled the high winds" is an oft-repeated legend in the
‘Sangam’ age and in later literature. He was a legendary Cola
and an ancestor of Karikala of the second century ap.'* The
Tamils were familiar with the harrowing experience of being
caught in a storm in mid-Ocean.'"? However, the ‘sails of the
ships helped the vessels to pierce the stormy waves of the ocean’
and ‘on board the ship drums were beaten and tall flags were
External Trade / 181
waving from the mast.?? While at harbour, the ships were
anchored by a thick, long rope to the nether end of which a
big stone was attached.”!
The harbour was called Puhar or ‘Kayavoy’. The Pattina-
ppalai describes the harbour of Puhar or Kavérippimpattinam.
The harbour, it is claimed, was generally safe even for bigger
vessels. They could enter the harbour without removing cargo
or slacking sail and yet be quite stable, steady and safe.”2 Evidence
of such a harbour is hardly available in the present Puhar, and
the legend of the port’s submersion into the sea may well be
based on fact. Warehouses were built on the beach near the
quarters of the fishermen (paratavar’). The two kinds of goods
(exports and imports) were found crowded on the quay.’ Light
houses called kalam karai ilangu cudar—'the light that beckons
the ship’—are referred to.”
Articles of Trade
Many articles of trade passed through or were directly exported
from Tamil ports en route to the Roman empire and to other
regions of the west. The transit goods, some of which also entered
the internal exchange of Tamilakam were spikenard from the
Ganges region, silk from China, tortoiseshell from Southeast
Asia and the islands near the Kerala coast.” The Tamil sources
refer to silk as pattu.”” However such references do not indicate
the direction or region from which it came to Tamilakam. Early
medieval inscriptional evidence would place the region of origin
in China. The Penplus points to China as the region from which
silk reached the Ganges valley, from where it may have reached
Tamilakam down the east coast to the Tamil ports, and then
was sent to the west. Silk entered the internal circuit of exchange
through gifts by rulers to panar (bards) and as a luxury item of
the ruling and urban elite’s attire.
Spices, a major item of export, came predominantly from the
western hills of Kerala, particularly pepper and cardamom.
However, with the increase in the demand for spices by the first
and second centuries AD, spices were also procured from South-
east Asia and sent to the Tamil ports to be shipped on to the
182 ¥ Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
west” Fragrant woods, although available indigenously, were
also a part of the transit trade, for they came from Southeast
Asia, in addition to those from the hilly regions of South India.*
Wheeler’s assessment that with Tamilakam the western trade
was basically terminal, with a modicum of transit trade,” is to
be revised in the light of the increase in the movement of spices,
pearls, jewel stones and muslins, which came not only from the
Tamil region but also from Southeast Asia and Sri Lanka. It is
interesting that although ‘Argaritic’ muslins (from Uratyur) were
in demand in the Roman world, Tamilakam imported the
kalagam and kalingam (two varieties of fine fabric) from Burma
and Kalinga respectively.° This would also indicate that the
trade in textiles grew in volume and Tamil ports exported both
locally produced ‘Argaritic’ fabrics and those for transit. These
fabrics also entered the internal circuit of exchange, mainly
through gifts to poets and bards.*! A variety of thin cloth from
Egypt (?) is also known to have been imported in addition to
kalagam and kalingam.
Cotton fabric was the only manufactured item of export
(apart from jewellery), produced both in the Cola and Pandya
regions. While the Arthasastra® refers to the fabric from Madu-
rai in the Pandya region, the Perplus refers to the ‘Argaritic’
muslins of Uraiyir in the Cola land.** The Tamil sources refer
to several varieties of cotton fabrics. Tuhil was a fine cotton
cloth.** It was woven in Tamilakam and resembled steam or
vapour and had so fine a texture that the threads could not
be easily traced. It had floral patterns.*® It was in great demand
among the Romans. The Silappadikaram™ refers to thirty two
varieties of cotton fabrics. Archaeological evidence in this regard
is not highly illuminating although the occurrence of terracotta
spindle whorls in Kunnattur, Odugattur and Sanur” and in
Kodumanal,”* dyeing vats in Arikamédu, Uraiyir and Vasava-
samudram seem to indicate their manufacture on a considerable
scale.
Two other major items of Tamilakam’s trade with the west
were undoubtedly pearls and pepper. Although a variety of gems
seem to have been exported from the Tamil ports, the evidence
On muttu or pearls is direct and indisputable. Of the other gems,
beryl is known to be an important item of export, although it
External Trade ft 183
is not mentioned in the Tamil literature itself. The beryl mines
of Padiyir in the Coimbatore district are well known.” It is
located not far from Kodumanal, on the Noyyal river, the
Kodumanam of ‘Sangam’ works, famous for its jewel craft and
goldsmiths.” Surface collections and excavations have yielded a
large number of precious and semi-precious stones in Kodu-
manal, apart from coins, both local and Roman, in the region
around Kodumanal, thus providing evidence of its being an
important craft centre. Significantly, this centre falls within the
region ruled by the Ceras with their capital at Karir-Vafici, and
the reference to Kodumanam occurs in the Patirruppattu, the
ten-tens or poems composed on the Ceéras. Beryl mines have also
been located in Vaniyambadi in the Salem (North Arcot?)*!
district and additional sources were tapped by the second cen-
tury AD, perhaps in the days of Ptolemy when Punnata near
Melkote in Karnataka agd Sri Lanka may also have been ex-
ploited.”
Excavations in the Coimbatore region have brought to light
six-sided beryl prisms, which have been interpreted as evidence
of exchange of beryl for Roman coins,® for this region abounds
in Roman coin finds. It is not clear when and how beryl entered
long-distance trade. However, an initial ‘trickle’ in the pre-Chris-
tian era seems to have developed into a sustained commerce in
the early centuries AD. The Arthasastra mentions vaidurya (beryl)
which, according to the commentators, came from the ‘southern
mountains’(?).“ The term vaidurya may well have been of Dravid-
ian origin. It is also probable that the Greek word for it—
berullos—is derived from vatdurya.”
Diamonds, sapphires, rubies and transparent stones of all
kinds were exported. Most of them came from Sri Lanka, famed
for the best quality gems** and Andhra region (Cuddapah and
Kurnool) and Karnataka (the upper Godavari and Kaveri valley)
and perhaps even from Gujarat and Kathiawar.‘’ The Patt-
nappalai® says that to Puhar gems came from the ‘northern
mountains’, which is generally taken to be the Himalayas, but
could really have been Cuddapah and Kurnool system of the
Deccan and the Vindhyan range. The references in Tamil litera-
ture, to sapphire, ruby, crystal, coral and gems (mani) in general
are numerous,” but not precise enough to help identify places
184 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
of their origin. Except for pearls and beryl, the rest would seem
to have come from adjacent and other distant regions. The
Sangam literary references to varieties of gems, lapidary (manz-
vannakkan), jeweller (manikuyirrunar) and goldsmiths (por-kollar)
etc. would suggest that a direct result of this movement in gem
rade was the high degree of skills that the Tamils acquired in
jewel-making,” and jewels seem to have been an important item
of export, especially from the Pandya country.*' To the Pandyan
coast came ‘horses and other precious things’ which were
presumably exchanged for gems.
Muttu or pearls, from which the Sanskrit mukta is derived, in
fact heads the categories of gems exported from the eastern waters.
South Indian pearls were rated among the best and highly valued
in the ancient world, as borne out by Sanskrit, Greek and Tamil
sources.» They found their way to Southeast Asia, China and
Andhra and Ganges regions in India. They also reached in
considerable quantity the Malabar ports of Muziris (Muciri) and
Nelcynda (Kottayam) from where they were exported to Rome.”
They could have reached the western ports either by the circum-
peninsular route or by coastal shipping or even by the transpenin-
sular route through the Palghat gap. They were used by the ruling
elite both in adorning themselves and as gifts to bards.*° Refer-
ences to their place in the internal trade, however, are few and
ambiguous.” There are hardly any significant finds in excavations
except for Korkai, which has come up with oyster shells.°’ The
Colas and Pandyas, not surprisingly, laid claims to the pearl
coast—from the Tamraparni basin to Tondi in the Ramanatha-
puram district—and it would appear that the Colas were par-
ticularly interested in controlling the pearl-rich Pandya coast as
much as the pepper-rich Céra coast, both pearls and pepper being
major items of export. Plunder mechanism was one of the most
conspicuous and successful means of acquiring such valuables
for exchange and consumption.
Gems (mani—a generic term) and jewellery made out of them
were a part of the decorative paraphernalia associated with the
ruling and urban elite and, both as trade items and elite symbols,
they are frequently mentioned in Tamil sources. However, ex-
cavations, with the exception of Kodumanal, have yielded a
rather limited number of crystal, chalcedony, agate, carnelian
External Trade J 185
and other semi-precious stones, while pearls are the least repre-
sented in archaeology. It would appear from literary references
and archaeological evidence that the main impact of the gem
trade was in the area of manufacturing jewels and trading in
this finished product, a concentration of archaeological evidence
coming from Kodumanal.
It may be suggested that, unlike for pepper and beryl, of
which the Tamils had exclusive monopoly, for carnelian, agate
and other gems the Tamil merchants would have faced com-
petition from the northern merchants, especially those of Bharu-
kaccha (Barygaza), where these figure as important exports,*?
and also from Sri Lanka, to which the western traders may have
turned directly by the second century aD after the ‘discovery’
of the monsoons, which enabled Greek ships to sail to the
island’s coasts and the eastern coast of Tamilakam. By the third
century AD, or immediately after, the ports of the island seem
to have become important entrepots, as the evidence of the
Cosmos Indicopleustus of the sixth century AD® indicates, and the
focus of trade in the Indian Ocean shifted from the Tamil
country to the island.*!
Thus, at least during the early centuries of the Christian
era, the Tamil merchants seem to have acted as middlemen
for the Sri Lankan articles exported to the west, and hence
faced competition from the indigenous Ilam (Sri Lanka) mer-
chants. This could well have been the reason behind the several
conflicts between the peoples of the island and those of the
Tamil mainland.” The presence of Tamil merchants in Ilam
making donations to Buddhist shrines® and a few Ilam mer-
chants in the Tamil region,” is attested to by inscriptional
records of this period. The initiative may have come from the
Tamil merchants and later shifted, after competition, to the
Sri Lankan merchants.
Spices, not necessarily a luxury item, formed the other major
item of export. Among them, in terms of quantity, pepper
(kari) ranked the highest, especially to the Roman empire. Pepper
perhaps made up three-fourths of the total bulk of the average
Rome-bound cargo,® or more than half. The Periplus*’ says
that the ships which visited the western (Malabar) ports in the
first century AD were of a large size, on account of the pepper
186 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
that was being carried. Common black pepper was exported
from Kutta nadu (Cottanara—the region around Quilon and
K6ttayam), where the climate was most conducive to its growth.
Thus it 1s said:
_.. Céra’s great river Culli splashes with white foam where Yavanas
bring their well built ships, arriving with gold and carrying pepper
from the prosperous Muciri, reverberating with the Ocean.°
The Pattinappalai® refers to sacks of black pepper reaching
the Cola port of Kaverippumpattinam by carts, presumably by
the circumpeninsular route from the west coast. The references
to pepper or other spices going to north India are few, but
evidence of its entering the internal exchange system in Tamil-
akam is available. The Colas and Pandyas would have attempted
to control the west coast, the only region where pepper was
available, and hence the Céras having a virtual monopoly over
it. The ports of Muziris (Muciri) and Nelcynda (Kottayam) owed
much of their prosperity to the pepper trade and became
prominent commercial centres. It is possible that Tondi (Tyndis)
was also involved in a small way in this trade through the
Ponnani river, whose tributaries would have brought down the
pepper from the Malabar hills.
About Muciri we are told:
Paddy heaped up, traded for fish makes it difficult to distinguish tall
ships from the houses.
Sacks of pepper, piled beside the buildings become confusing on
the bustling sea front. Articles of gold brought by sea vessels are carried
to the shore by boats in the estuary. Products of his (Céra’s) mountains
and products of his seas, he brings together to bestow on his visitors,
with toddy like a river, the gold mountain Kuttuvan, his noisy Muciri
throbs as the Ocean.”
Cardamom, yet another important spice exported to the
west, 1s found in Travancore, Malabar and the highlands
bordering the districts of Madurai, Tirunelveli and Dindigul.’!
However, strangely enough, there is hardly any direct reference
to cardamom in the Tamil sources, although it is well known
to the classical accounts. Malabathrum ‘from the interiors’?
was another export from the west coast and has been identified
as betel leaf or cinnamon bark(?)”? although it is said to be
External Trade / 187
of inferior quality when compared to that (cinnamon) from
China, Sri Lanka, Southeast Asia and the Himalayas.
Nard (Nardus), yet another item of export which figures along
with malabathrum, seems to be a grass or leaf (lemon grass?),
found in the Cera region. It was used to extract an oil, a fragrant
one, for cosmetic purposes (Cymbopogan Nardus),” and the
Seleucids are believed to have attempted to naturalize it in their
country. It was known to Pliny and the Penplus as the sweet-
smelling oil of the Nard—the word probably derived from
Narantam in Tamil.”
It has already been noted that, under the impetus of the
lucrative spice trade, the early Tamil merchants sought new
sources for the spices and turned to the spice rich Southeast
Asian islands.”
Among the forest products, woods of all sorts—ornamental
and aromatic—entered this commercial network. The most
notable were sandalwood, teak, ebony and eaglewood, most of
which grew in the hilly tracts of Coimbatore—Salem, Malabar
and Karnataka.”” None of them, however, is listed among the
exports from the Tamil ports by the Periplus.”* Though the
forests of Central India could have been tapped,” the forests
of Tamilakam may also have been a major source. They were
also brought, along with spices, from the Southeast Asian
islands, presumably in response to increasing demands from
the west.
The Silappadikaram says:
The broad rayed sun ascends from the South. White clouds start to
form in the early cool season. Only after this time, across the dark
bellowing ocean, the rulers of Tondi dispatch vessels loaded with akhil
wood (eaglewood), silk, sandal and spices and all sorts of camphor.
These are wafted with the wind from the east.”
The imports to South India, several of which are known
from the Periplus,*' consisted of coin, topaz, coral, thin clothing
and figured linens, antimony, copper, tin and lead, wine,
realgar and orpiment and also wheat, the last mentioned
probably for the Graeco-Romans in the Tamil ports. Of
these, wine is by far the most conspicuously mentioned item
in the Sangam works in a variety of contexts, particularly
188 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
in connection with the ruling and urban elite. Roman wine
was very popular with the Tamils, who were familiar with
its quality and fragrance. In the Purananuru, a poet lauds
a Pandya king:
O Mara, whose sword is ever victorious, spend thou thy days in peace
and joy drinking daily out of golden cups presented by the hand-
maids...
the cool and fragrant wine (téral) brought by the Yavanas in their
good ships... ®
Amphorae sherds have been excavated from Arikamedu,
Vasavasamudram and Karaikkadu, while those reported from
Kaficipuram do not appear to be amphorae, but, rather, im-
itations in the form of conical jars. Some of them show traces
of incrustation on the inside caused by wine resin.®
The Yavana lamp, whose wick was capable of giving out a
steady flame without a flicker, was also an item of considerable
demand in Tamilakam. It was a novelty to the Tamils. Some of
them were like statues bearing in their folded palms the takali
or the container for the lamp.** The pavai vilakku, a female
statue holding a lamp in its hands, is a common sight in most
temples and households in Tamilakam even today. Although
there are no references to it in the Periplus, the fact that different
metals are mentioned as imports, would suggest that some at
least would be finished products like lamps. While copper and
bronze articles including jewellery are found in Megalithic
burials,*° no evidence of lamps has so far been found in
excavations.
Roman coins came in large quantities, in exchange for pepper,
beryl and cotton fabrics and a concentration of these coins
occurs in major trade routes like the Coimbatore district and
the Pudukkottai area. As discussed in a previous chapter, their
circulation and use as a medium of exchange have been one of
the major points of dispute among scholars. Their value as
exchange-medium being indeterminable in the South Indian
context, it has often been suggested that they were generally
used as bullion, although some, at least, were turned into
jewellery, as seen in the pierced coins used as pendants.
The Tamil sources have very little to offer by way of evidence
External Trade J 189
on Roman coins. Even at the level of larger transactions involved
in import and export of goods, it is mainly for pepper that
Roman gold is said to have been exchanged. There is also no
reference to exchange of specie (foreign) at ports with native
currency as in the Perplus*® for Barygaza. The term kasu, pon
and kanam occurring in the Tamil poems and mentioned as
currency units in early medieval inscriptions®’ have been pre-
sumed to be gold coins.** Nothing is known about their metal
content or weight. On the other hand, the kdmam and kdsu were
conferred as gifts by patron rulers on poets. Thus, Arisil Kilar
received a gift of 900,000 kanam (gold) and Kakkaippadiniyar
Naccellaiyar 100,000 kanam (gold).*’ Such references occur in
the padtkams of the Patirruppattu,® which are generally believed
to be later additions to the main body of the poems.
Tamilakam had access to the gold from Karnataka, Le.
Raichur-Bellary plateau which is presumably the region referred
to as the northern hills (vadamalat) in the Tamil texts.”! The
gold mines in Karnataka have provided evidence of ancient
workings. Gold articles and jewellery figure prominently among
gifts conferred by chieftains on bards” and are generally found
to be associated with the ruling and urban elite.”’ Goldsmiths
and traders in gold (ponsey-kollan and pon-vanigar) are mentioned
there are no major finds of gold in the archaeological levels
of this period, except for some exquisite pieces of jewellery at
Suttukkeni, three gold beads at Arikamédu, what has been
reported as a ‘goldsmith’s mould’ from Paiyampalli,” and a
few pieces from Kodumanal.
Horses, for the breeding of which the southern climate was
not conducive, have always been imported into South India,
mainly from the Arab countries. The Pattinappalai refers to milk
white steeds imported into Puhar, while the Madurarkkanca makes
a reference to their import to the Pandyan ports.”’ The Tondat-
nadu port of Nirppeyar received horses in ships.” Strangely,
horses were also gifted by rulers to bards.” References to horses
as gifts are fewer than to other items, perhaps due to their
military importance to the rulers.'!° Nonetheless, what 1s inter-
esting is that to the bards or poets, such gifts as those of horses
and elephants, appear to be of no immediate use or value.
190 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Horsebits or articles associated with the use of horses are
reported in the early levels of excavations at Sanur, Kunnattur
and Adichanallir but the correctness of their identification has
been questioned.'®!
The majority of the exports would thus seem to be raw
materials, with the exception of cotton fabrics and jewellery
made of gold and gems. The impact of such an exchange on
the manufacturing activities of Tamilakam 1s hard to assess. The
evidence points only to a minimal range of craft production—
fabrics and jewels—and their being located at key centres—the
consumption points in the interior, the areas where mines were
located (beryl—Coimbatore) and the ports where commercial
activities were concentrated.
The stress was undoubtedly on the export and import of elite
and luxury goods such as horses, gold, gems etc., which were
meant for elite consumption and not for local exchange. Chiefly
families acquired and used them for enhancing their status and
prestige and legitimized it by conferring gifts on poets and
bards. The importance of primitive valuables has been stressed
for their socio-political significance in early societies.’ Thus,
‘rare and precious things’! were gifted away by the Pandya
king. The Cera ruler is lauded for bringing together products
of the seas to bestow on visitors.' In return for the valuable
gifts, the bards and kinsmen played an important role in
legitimizing and sustaining the position of their patron rulers.
The nature of commodities exported (pearls, pepper and
textiles) indicates that the Céra and Pandya regions, which
were in possession of these resources, would have. been the
chief beneficiaries of this trade, and one could expect a positive
impact on the productive system of both these areas. The Cola
region (lower Kaveri valley), which had greater agricultural
potential, was not in possession of any of these commodities,
with the exception of cotton muslins. They did not directly
control any of the hill resources. Their control over the Palk
Bay and the beryl mines of the Kongu plateau (which strictly
speaking falls within the Céra region around Karur-Vafici) and
over the routes to the western coast and southern Karnataka,
was fluctuating, as it was the result of temporary raids and
successes over the Ceras. Yet all the sources, particularly Tamil
External Trade / 191
works like Pattinappalai, indicate that most of these com-
modities produced in the Tamil country and in the neighbour-
ing regions, reached the early Cola port of Kavérippampattinam
and were subsequently exported." The Colas seem to have
acquired a sort of hegemonic control over Tamilakam by
constantly exhibiting their superior prowess over the other two
of the traditional Tamil trio (chiefly families or kingdoms?)
and over the major routes facilitating the internal movement
of goods to the ports of embarkation/export, i.e. over the
commerce between Tamilakam, Roman west, Sri Lanka and
Southeast Asian countries.
It is in this context that the tsai concept of eco-zones of the
Tamil works hold a valuable clue to the resources of various
regions and to the base that the Colas were able to build up—by
way of paddy or agricultural production—and, thereby, possibly
promote the acquisition of other resources through paddy and
salt. It is significant that the Céra, Cola and Pandya ports were
located at the mouths of the major rivers of these regions. Of
these, which figure prominently in the classical accounts, it 1s
significant that some seem to have been more active in the first
centuries BC and aD like Muziris (Muciri) and Korkai (Colchi),
while the Cola port Khaberis (Camara or Kavérippattinam) was
active in the second century ab. In the time of the Peniplus,
which sets out in detail the ports and commerce of the western
coast, the eastern Coromandel coast and the Cola ports seem
to have been beyond the bounds of the Greek vessels. Later, by
the second century AD, under better incentives, and even to the
point of doing away with Tamil intermediaries, the Greeks seem
to have surmounted the difficulties of the straits and circum-
navigating Sri Lanka and established direct contact with the
Cola ports, and even navigated upto the Bengal coast. This 1s
not only reflected in Ptolemy’s geography (Ap 150), which gives
a detailed list of ports and marts along the eastern coast of the
sub-continent, but is more directly attested to by the Pattina-
ppalai, a work datable to this period, and a work composed with
the specific purpose of describing the port city of Kaverippum-
pattinam, which was built and developed by the Cola Karikala.
Similar works describing the other major ports do not exist. In
fact, it would appear that the Colas had a clear objective in
192 f Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
developing a port, a harbour (Puhar) of this kind, which, in
many ways, acted like a ‘gateway city’ in the early centuries,
particularly in the second century aD when the trade in that
city was at its peak.'%
Kavérippumpattinam, as portrayed in this work, had well
organized markets—ndlangadi (day) and allangad: (night)—quar-
ters for various social and economic groups in the two major
sections called the Pattinappakkam (the city or residential area)
and the maruvarppakkam (port area) and the major commercial
area being located between the two. Excavations conducted
here have shown its occupation and use at least from the third
century Bc to the fourth-fifth centuries AD, and the wharf
remains etc. show facilities needed for a harbour. It is located
at the mouth of the Kaveri, where the river itself becomes a
rather shallow stream hardly reaching the sea, perhaps as a
result of the damming up of the river at Talakaveri and the
flow of water controlled so as to channel it towards the Kolli-
dam and the distribution of the delta.
While Tamil literature distinctly uses the term pattinam for
a port, all coastal towns are not referred to as such with the
exception of Kaverippumpattinam (Puhar). To a large extent
this port fits in with the description of an emporium. Polanyi'”
points out that in classical Greek terminology, the emporium
was that part or sector of a coastal town which was devoted to
foreign commerce. However, the emporium was much more
than that. It was a self-contained unit with its own food, market,
harbour, quay, warehouses, administrative building, mariner’s
houses and so on. In Puhar the Cola officers with the tiger
stamp oversaw all activities, collected tolls/customs etc. As a
gateway city, Puhar overshadowed, by its importance, all other
entry points to South India.
In another sphere, the impact of maritime trade may be
recognized in the changing fortunes of the Paratavar, who
became the most distinctive merchant group in the latter part
of this period of intensive trade. According to the traditional
tina scheme, they were inhabitants of the meital tract, simple
rustic folk, following occupations such as fishing, manufactur-
ing salt and making toddy.'® The later poems of the Pattu-
ppattu collection, however, depict them as being involved in
External Trade ys 193
long-distance commerce and also pearl fishing. Under the
influence of commercial activities, they diversified from these
traditional pursuits and took to organizing trade in pearls,
conches, chank bangles, tamarind, fish, gems, horses and other
riches.’ Here trade seems to have been a dynamic intrusive
element leading to the development of this tract and its
people.'”°
Many other types of merchants were also involved in the
buying of goods from the hills and from the sea (coast), and
carrying them to various centres within the Tamil region.!'!!
Specialist merchants operated within the precincts of large
commercial cities such as Madurai, Uraiyar and Puhar, where
market facilities (amgadi) were available. Their names invariably
carried as a prefix the place of their origins, e.g. Madurai Aruvai
Vanikan (the cloth trader from Madurai), Uraiyur Ilampon
Vanikan (the young gold trader from Uraiyur) etc.
The occasional caravans (cattu) of itinerant traders carried
goods to the hinterlands from ports, and perhaps also returned
with goods to be shipped from such ports.''? Evidence on guild
organization is tenuous and not comparable to that of the
Deccan.''? The Silappadikaram is the story of the son of a great
caravan leader (Masattuvan), and hence of considerable value in
understanding the nature of trade and trading patterns, both
internal and external.
One of the most interesting consequences of the commercial
interaction between Tamilakam and other regions was the
arrival of foreign merchants at the Tamil ports and commercial
centres.''4
In Puhar,
different kinds of goods (were) brought in ships by foreign merchants
(Pulam-Peyar-makkal) who have left their native homes and settled
here.
There is very little information about the regions from where
these ‘foreign merchants hailed, but certainly they included
people from Rome, Southeast Asia, Ilam (Sri Lanka) and even
other parts of the subcontinent. Separate quarters existed for the
Yavanas in the empona, as indicated by the later evidence of the
Silappadikaram.''® However, to conclude that these quarters were
194 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
‘autonomous concessions’ or ‘territorial acquisitions’ similar to
latter day European ‘factories’, is going beyond the evidence.'””
Did the Greeks (and Romans) play the most active role in
this commerce as is held by various scholars,'® or did they
confine their activities to the major commercial centres, while
in the hinterlands, the production and transportation to the
waiting ships, were in the hands of local traders and craftsmen?!”
The accounts of Pliny and the Perplus'*® would seem to support
the latter contention. The Tamil sources, would, much more
clearly, indicate the active role of Tamil merchants, a flourishing
indigenous mercantile community, while, as Filliozat puts it,
the foreigners had probably nothing more to do than load their
vessels from the readymade warehouses, and increase the ac-
tivities of warehouses, without either having to organize or
administer them.'?! No foreigners are seen making donations
to local religious organizations as in the Deccan, where they
were absorbed into the indigenous social organization. Indeed,
such large-scale and impressive monumental religious institu-
tions and the ostentatious gifts as found in the Deccan, are
absent in the Tamilakam of this period. Tamil literature is silent
on such gifts, although references are made to some cult centres
and shrines, which were not part of an organized and institu-
tionalized religious system.
The life style of the native merchants points to affluence, as
the merchants are depicted in later poems as living in ‘fine
mansions and sporting silk raiments and gold jewellery,'”* and
the later epics Silappadikaram and Manimekalai focus on their
prosperity and affluent life style. That they followed a self-im-
posed code of behaviour is known from the general attributes
which the Pattinappalat'® speaks of:
They speak the truth and deem it a shame to lie
For others’ goods they have the same regard as for their own in
trade
Nor do they try to get too much in selling their own goods
Nor give too little when they buy
They set a fair price on all things
Their ancient wealth was thus acquired.
Tamil traders in general seem to have followed different
External Trade J 195
religious faiths, unlike in the Deccan and Andhra regions, where
the trading community’s affiliation to the Buddhist (and per-
haps also Jain) religion was predominant. While the early Tamil
poems reflect the predominance of tribal forms of worship and
cult deities specific to different eco-zones as well as the influence
of brahmanical religions in the marutam zone, the post Sangam
epics, viz. Silappadikaram and Manimekalai, show the increasing
influence of Buddhism and Jainism over the trading community
and, in an urban context, both in coastal towns and interior
politico-commercial centres. The Tamil Brahmi inscriptions’
would also support the Buddhist and Jain bias of the merchants,
who are seen making gifts to these two sects.
The emergence and crystallization of a merchant community
with well organized guilds as in the Deccan and Andhra are
not clearly attested to in the literary sources. The Tamil
anthologies mention several kinds of traders, including hawkers,
peddlers (vambalar, vilainar, pakarnar) and big traders (vani-
gar), as well as those who traded in specific items (umanar—salt
merchants). In the market places (angadis) of big centres like
Puhar and Madurai, several specialist traders selling particular
wares are known.'”? Most of them were, however, producers as
well as sellers of such articles. They were, tn general, different
from those involved in trade with distant regions and foreign
traders. It would be rather difficult to rank the different traders
on the basis of the volume of trade which they conducted.
Such evidence is not easy to find in the texts. However, the
epics, while referring to the merchants and their influence,
would seem to point to wealthy merchants, whose presence in
the commercial and port towns was significant. They would
most likely be those who conducted large-scale trading and
commercial activities and possibly also controlled the move-
ment of goods within the region. Thus, guild organization
would have been important in regulating such movement. The
references to Masdttuvan (caravan leader) in the Silappadi-
haram, to Kaviti and nigama in Tamil Brahmi inscriptions,'”*
interpreted as guild chief (or, more correctly, counsellor) and
guild respectively, would indicate the prevalence of such or-
ganization. However, organized guilds and trading networks
coinciding with the important Buddhist centres with huge
196 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
monastic establishments of the kind found in Deccan and
Andhra regions, are certainly not visible in Tamilakam.
The early Tamil poems are generally silent on the origin of
merchants, although in early societies merchants are said to
have emerged from among chiefly families, since the redistribu-
tional mechanism, which operated in most chiefdoms, led to
concentration of economic wealth in the hands of those close
to the chief.'2” One may recall in this connection the circulation
of wealth through gifts among kinsmen close to the Sangam
chiefs, both the Vendar and the Vélir. Virai was as much a port
of the Velir chief,'”* as Puhar was of the Colas, Korkai of the
Pandyas and Muciri of the Ceras, all of which point to the
direct involvement of the ruling elite in the promotion of
trade.
In early societies, under the influence of trade and the
consequent development of a market and its organization, it is
believed that an emergent state system resorted to minting coins
to facilitate long-distance trade.'”? Yet, in early Tamilakam,
long-distance trade does not seem to have had any significant
impact over the emergence of a state society, for trade and urban
processes were not built into the core of the transformation of
a non-state to state society in early Tamilakam. At the same
time, recent finds of local coin issues suggest a direct impact
of inter-regional and maritime trade.
References
1. C. Maloney, ‘The Effect of Early Coastal Sea Traffic on the
Development of Civilization in South India’, Ph.D. Dissertation
(unpublished), University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 1968,
xlv.
2. Kamil Zvelebil, The Smile of Murugan: On the Tamil Literature of
South India, E.J. Brill, Leiden, 1973, 27-43.
3. Rajan Gurukkal, ‘Forms of Production and Forces of Changes
in Ancient Tamil Society’, Studies in History, July-Dec. 1989 (n.s.),
vol. 5, no. 2, 159-76.
4. See Chapter 1 in this volume.
5. Porunararruppatai, \\. 214;J.V. Chelliah, Pattuppattu—The Ten Tamil
External Trade / 197
Idylls (tr. into English with Introduction and Notes), SISSW,
Tirunelveli, 1962, 2nd edn, 73-5.
. Mullaippattu, \\. 59-66.
. Silappadikaram, xv: 67.
NCI oN. Subrahmanian, Pre-Pallavan Tamil Index—Index of the Historical
Material in Pre-Pallavan Tamil Literature, Madras, 1966. Also idem
Sangam Polity-The Administration and Social Life of the Sangam
Tamils, Madurai, 1980 (Rev. ed.).
. RS. Kennedy, “King in Early South India: As Chieftain and
Emperor’, /ndian Historical Review, 1976, vol. m, 1-15; Maloney,
‘Early Coastal Sea Traffic’, 228, K.K. Pillay, A Social History of
the Tamils, Madras, 1975, reprint, 249f.
. Purananiru, 343: 1-10; Akandnuru, 149: 7-11; Periplus: 56-61.
W.H. Schoff, The Periplus of the Erythraean Sea. Travel and Trade
in the Indian Ocean by a Merchant of the Ist Century (tr. from the
Greek and annotated), Longmans, Green & Co., New York, 1912.
K.R. Hall, ‘The Expansion of Maritime Trade in the Indian
Ocean: Roman Trade in the Indian Ocean: An Indian Pers-
pective’, The Elmira Review, vol. 1, 40.
. William Logan, Malabar Manual, Madras, 1951, 1, 199.
. Patirruppattu, i: 10.
. Subrahmanian, Sangam Polity, 240.
. Warmington, Commerce Between the Roman Empire and India, New
Delhi, 1974, reprint, 66. Recently two potsherds have been dis-
covered at Quseir-al-Qadim, a small Egyptian port on the Red
Sea, with brief inscriptions in the Tamil Brahmi script, presumab-
ly the names of Tamil traders—Catan and Kanan—reported by
Whitcomb and Johnson in the Oriental Institute (Chicago) Annual
Report, 1977-8, reprint.
. Purananuru: 182.
Ibid.: 66.
Subrahmanian, Sangam Polity, 241.
Manimekalai, 1, 29-34.
. Maduraikkanct: 77-83; Pattinappalai: 173-5.
. Maduraikkanct: 378, smaller boats used in river transport are
known as ambi, pahn, and Odai (Akananuru: 29:18; 101:12; 187:23;
Ainkurunuru: 98:2; 168:2; Narrinat: 74:3; 315:3; 354:7;
Purananuru: 261:4; 34; 3:2; 381:24) and larger boats as Kalam
Vangam, navay (and TimiP) (Akam: 13:5; 26:2; 30:12-13; 56:321;
Narrinat: 295:6; Pattinappalat: 174; Perumpanarruppatat: 321). Were
they used for sea voyages? The Periplus (60) refers to these types,
a small one used by natives for coastal traffic, a larger one called
198 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Sangara made of several logs fastened together (Kattumaram?) and
vessels of large bulk called Kolandiaphonta, for sea voyages to
Ganges delta and Southeast Asia for bringing spices and woods.
Whose ships were they?
. Purananiru: 30; Maduratkkanci: 54.
. Pattinappalar: 130-1.
._ Perumpanarruppatat: 349-51; Subrahmanian, Sangam Polity, 242.
. Periplus: 56-64; McCrindle, The Commerce and Navigation of the
Erythraean Sea and Ancient India as Described by Ktestas, the Knidian,
Amsterdam, 1973, Reprint.
. Akananiru: 236: 11; Pattinappalai, |. 107; Porunararruppatai, \. 155;
Silappadikaram, v. 16; x1v: 86; 205; xm: 46.
. Silappadikaram: xv: 104-12; Maloney, ‘Early Coastal Sea Traffic’,
162-3.
. Silappadikaram: x1: 104-12; Maloney, “Early Coastal Sea Traffic’,
162-3; Vasam is the term used for spices in Silappadikaram (xiv:
108). It denotes five objects, viz. Takkolam or Elam or cardamom,
Timpu or saffron flower, /lavangam or clove, Karpuram or cam-
phor, Sat: (kka1) or nutmeg. See Subrahmanian, Pre-Pallavan Tamil
Index, 749.
Ls R.E.M. Wheeler, Rome Beyond the Imperial Frontiers, Pelican, Lon-
don, 1955, 164.
30. Subrahmanian, Pre-Pallavan Tamil Index, 233, 270; Purananum,
41: 9; Pattinappalai, |. 191; Silappaditkaram, xw, 104-12.
. Akananuru, 86: 21; 136: 20; Purananuru, 398: 28; Kuruntokai, 167:
2; Maduratkkanci, |. 517, 721; Cirupanarruppatai, ||. 85-96.
Arthasastra, 11: 11: 115 (Shama Sastry, Kautilya’s Arthasastra (tr.
into English, Mysore, 1951, 4th edn)).
. Periplus: 59.
. Pattinappalai, |. 235; Cirupanarruppatai, \. 236.
. Purananuru, 398: 20; Porunararruppatai, \l. 82-3.
. Stlappadikaram, vi: 88.
. R.Sumathi, ‘Trade and Its Impact on the Early Tamils—The Cola
Experience’, M.Phil Dissertation (unpublished), New Delhi, Jawa-
harlal Nehru University, 1984, App.c.
. Dr Y. Subbarayalu and his team from the Tamil University,
Thanjavur, have been excavating at this site for over four seasons
now. | am indebted to him for providing me with copies of the
interim reports on the site.
39. G. Watt, The Commercial Products of India, Today and Tomorrow’s
Printers and Publishers, New Delhi, 1966, reprint, 556.
40. Patirruppattu, 67: 1; 74: 5.
External Trade ,.! 199
. Warmington, Commerce Between the Roman Empire and India,
250-1.
. Ptolemy, vii, 1: 86; vii: 4: 1. (McCrindle, Ancient India as Described
by Ptolemy, Calcutta, 1927, rev. ed.).
. Warmington, Commerce Between the Roman Empire and India, 251.
. Shama Sastry, Kautilya’s ArthaSastra, 71n.
Maloney, “Early Coastal Sea Traffic’, 214.
Ibid., 24.
. G. Watt, Commercial Products, 556-7.
Pattinappalai, |. 187.
Subrahmanian, Pre-Pallavan Tamil Index, 629-30.
Champakalakshmi, ‘Ornaments in the Sangam Age’, Journal of
Indian History, 1968, vol. xiv, 281-92.
. Maduratkkanc, |. 539.
Ibid., Il. 322-3.
Maloney, “Early Coastal Sea Traffic’, 7f.
Periplus: 56.
Purananuru, 378: 11-17; Akananuru, 26: 12; Patirruppattu, 23: 7;
67: 4; George L. Hart m, 7he Poems of Ancient Tamils: Their Milieu
and their Sanskrit Counterparts, University of California Press,
Berkeley, 1975, 60-1; K. Kailasapathy, Tamil Heroic Poetry, OUP,
1968, 227.
Akananuru, 13: 1.
Maloney, ‘Early Coastal Sea Traffic’, 9-10.
. Sumathi, ‘Trade and Its Impact’, App.c.
Periplus: 49.
XT: 445D.
. Warmington, Commerce Between the Roman Empire and India,
117-22; Paranavitana and Nichols, A Concise History of Ceylon
(from the earliest times to Portuguese invasion in 1505), Ceylon
University Press, Colombo, 1961, 10.
. Mahavamsa, 21: 10, 13; Silappadikaram, xxx, 160.
. Paranavitana, /nscriptions of Ceylon, vol. 1, Early Brahmi Inscriptions,
Colombo, 1970, nos 356 and 357.
. Mahadevan, ‘Corpus of the Tamil Brahmi Inscriptions’, in
Nagaswamy (ed.), Seminar on Inscriptions, Madras, 1968, no. 51.
. W.H. Schoff, The Periplus of the Erythraean Sea, 214.
Warmington, Commerce Between the Roman Empire and India, 181.
. Periplus: 56.
. Akananuru, 149: 7-11; Maloney, ‘Early Coastal Sea Traffic’, 182-3.
. Pattinappalai, |. 186.
Purananuru, 343: 1-10; Maloney, ‘Sea Traffic’, 182.
200 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
. Warmington, Commerce, 185.
. Pertplus: 56.
_ Maloney, ‘Sea Traffic’, 165; Warmington, Commerce, 188-90.
. Purananuru, 122; 502; Patirruppattu, 2.
. P.L. Samy, Sanga Ilakktyattil Sedikodi Vilakkam (Tamil), SSPS,
Madras, 65-71.
Silappadikaram, xw, 104-12.
. G. Watt, Commercial Products, 976.
. Periplus: 36.
G. Watt, Commercial Products, 1068.
Silappadikaram, xw, 104-12; Maloney, ‘Sea Traffic’, 162-3.
. Periplus: 56, 60.
Purananum, 56: 18-21; V. Kanakasabhai Pillai, 7he Tamils Eighteen
Hundred Years Ago, SISSW, Tirunelveli, 1966, reprint, 87.
. Wheeler, Rome, 177.
Perumpanarruppatat, 316-18; Netunalvatat, 101-3.
. B.K. Gururaja Rao, The Megalithic Culture in South India, Mysore,
1972, 88; Sumathi, ‘Trade and Its Impact’, App.c.
Periplus: 49.
. B.D. Chattopadhyaya, Coinage and Currency Systems in South India,
Delhi, 1977, 113.
. K.K. Pillay, A Social History of the Tamils, Madras, 1975, reprint,
245; Subrahmanian, Sangam Polity, 225.
Subrahmanian, Sangam Polity, 225.
Patirruppattu, Ww, Mi, vil.
Narrinat, 391: 6; Akananuru, 199: 19; Peinappalie l. 187.
Purananuru, 160:11; Maduraikkanci, mn 102-4; Porunararruppatai,
el bb Perumpandrruppatai, Il. 481-2.
. Pattinappalai, \\. 295-7, Maduraikkanci, 444-6, 775-9.
Narrinat, 313-21; Maduratkkanci, \\. $12-13.
. Mahadevan, ‘Corpus’, nos 30 & 66.
. Sumathi, ‘Trade and Its Impact’, App.c.
. Pattinappalai, \. 185; Maduratkkanci, \. 323.
. Perumpanarruppatat, \. 320.
. Ibid., Il. 26-8; 481-4; 490-3; Maduraikkanci, |. 224; Porunararru-
ppatat, |. 165.
. Kailasapathy, Tamil Heroic Poetry, 220-1.
. LS. Leshnik, The South Indian Megalithic Burials: The Pandukal
Complex, Wiesbaden, 1974, 47; 51-3; 68.
. S.F. Ratnagar, Encounters: The Westerly Trade of Harappa, OUP,
Delhi, 242.
. Maduratkkanci, 766.
External Trade \/ 201
Purananiru, 343: 8.
104.
105. Pattinappalai, 130-6, 185-95; Porunararruppatai, 238-9; Silappad:-
kadram, xv, 104-12; Periplus: 59, 60 & 63.
106. See Chapter 1 in this volume.
107. K. Polanyi, ‘Ports of Trade in Early Societies’, Journal ofE conomic
History, vol. xan, 34.
108. Zvelebil, The Smile of Murugan, 100.
109. Akananuru, 340: 16-17; 350: 11; Maduratkkanc, \\. 104-11; 315-24;
Perumpanarruppatai, \\. 319-24; Ainkurunuru, 195: 1-2; Maloney,
“Sea Traffic’, 117.
110. Maloney, ‘The Paratavar: 2000 Years of Culture Dynamics of a
Tamil Caste’, Man in India, 1969, vol. xiv, no. 3, 231-2.
Maduraikkanici, 379-400; 511-21; Silappadikaram, 24-39.
111.
112. Akananuru, 39: 10; 167; 245: 6; 291: 15; Narnnai, 183: 1-2; 254:
6; Perumpanarruppatai, \\. 59-80; Chelliah, Pattuppattu, 109-11.
113. There are only references to a trading guild, e.g. Nigama of
Vel-arai, Mankulam inscription—Mahadevan, ‘Corpus’, nos 3 &
6; and the Nigama occurring on a potsherd from Kodumanal.
114. Pattinappalai, 214-17; Silappadikaram, v: 6-12; Maduraikkanct,
359-60.
Silappadikaram, vi: 130-3; V.R.R. Dikshitar, The Cilappatikaram,
115.
SISSW, Tirunelveli, 1978, 142.
116. Silappadikaram, wi: 6-12.
117. Wheeler, Rome, 152.
118. Warmington, Commerce, Wheeler, Rome, and others.
119. J. Filliozat, ‘Intercourse of India with the Roman Empire during
the Opening Centuries of the Christian Era’, Journal of Indian
History, 1950, vol. xxvin, part 1, 40-1; Maloney, ‘Sea Traffic’, 184.
120. Pliny, vi: 105; vi: 2-10; Periplus: 55.
12K. Filliozat, ‘Intercourse of India’, 41.
122. Perumpanarruppatai, \\. 322-4, Maduraikkana, 500-2.
123. Pattinappalai, 196-213; Chelliah, Pattuppattu, 41.
124. Mahadevan, ‘Corpus’.
125. Sumathi, ‘Trade and Its Impact’, chapter vv.
126. Mahadevan, ‘Corpus’, no. 3.
127. M. Webb, ‘The Flag Follows Trade—An Essay on the Necessary
Interpretation of Military and Commercial Factors in State
Formation’, in Jeremy A. Sabloff and C.C. Lamberg Karlovsky
(eds), Ancient Civilization and Trade, Albuquerque, 1975, 179.
128. Champakalakshmi, ‘Archaeology and Tamil Literary Tradition’,
Puratattwa, 1975-6, vol. vi, 110-23.
202 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
129. Maloney, ‘Archaeology in South India: Accomplishments and
Prospects’, in B. Stein (ed.), Essays on South India, New Delhi,
1976, 17.
4
Developments Within:
Urban Processes in the Early
Medieval Period AD 600 c. to 1300
I: recent years much of the historical research on medieval
South India has concerned itself with agrarian structures,
peasant settlements and the general pattern of socio-economic
changes. Problems in the interpretation of epigraphic records,
the confused state of numismatic evidence and the inadequacy
of statistical data have deterred scholars from reconstructing the
history of urban development, despite their interest in trade
patterns, merchant and craft organizations, and state participa-
tion in such activities.
Conventional historical works’ abound in references to
urban centres and trade organizations, but fail to provide any
meaningful framework, conceptual or chronological, for under-
standing urban processes. One of the major flaws from which
such works suffer is purely methodological and lies mainly in
their isolated treatment of agrarian and urban institutions—and
their development—as entirely unrelated aspects, as also in
covering wide spans of time without pausing to recognize and
demarcate the phases indicating change or progress.
The study of the Cola state by Burton Stein’ introduces a
new conceptual model for the medieval South Indian state,
namely the segmentary state. This work makes serious efforts to
provide a framework for the empirical data on South India,
rather ambitiously attempting to cover a vast span of time, a
‘longitudinal interest’ of about seventeen centuries. Not-
withstanding the interest that it has aroused and the critiques
that it has provoked, the work has little to offer on urban
institutions. It takes passing note of the zagaram as an organiza-
tion of merchants and makes oblique references to ‘temple
urbanization’ of the twelfth—thirteenth centuries as an inevitable
part of the changing scene at the decline of Cola power. The
204 / Trade, Tdeology and Urbanization
author’s treatment of the nagaram is cursory and incidental to
his major concern, namely peasant society and the agrarian
order.
Some useful investigation in the direction has been made by
Kenneth R. Hall, whose works? are mainly devoted to the study
of the nagaram as a marketing centre. The works of both Stein
and Hall have undoubtedly been inspired by and draw largely
upon the scientific study of the agrarian unit called the nadu
and its assembly, the Nadu, by Y. Subbarayalu,* the madu being
the segment in Stein’s analysis of the Cola state and the nagaram
its marketing centre in Hall’s interpretation. While Hall’s works
are admittedly more relevant to the study of urban processes,
they also exhibit the same tendency as the others in treating the
whole of the Cola period (ap 850-1278) as an undifferentiated
unit, particularly in using epigraphic data of widely divergent
dates for the study of urban institutions like the magaram and
merchant guilds. His main work, Trade and Statecraft in the Age
of the Colas, however, lays emphasis on the role of the Periya
nadu and the increasing role of merchants, the latter in collusion
with warlords, as a contributory factor in the decline of the
Cola state.
Hall’s major concern is the magaram and its interaction with
other local institutions like the brabmadeya and ar and what he,
like Stein, calls the supra-local assembly, i.e. the Periya nadu. His
study of the Tiruvidaimarudur urban complex is an attempt to
view ‘the peasant state and society of Cola times’ from the
vantage point of an urban centre near the core of the Cola
region. This is partly a critique of Stein’s theory of a powerful
nattar and nadu autonomy. It posits the idea that Cola policy
favouring the nagaram as much as the Brahmadeya—in opposition
to the primacy of madu institutions—was aimed at reducing
nadu autonomy and discouraging the mutually supportive in-
teractions among local assemblies through the temple. These,
in Hall’s view, were the centralizing efforts of the Célas, in
response to which the nattar created the Periya nadu as a
supra-local unit of societal integration to protect their self-in-
terest vzs-d-vis the Colas.
It is not my direct concern here to show the incorrectness
of the assessment made by both Stein and Hall of the role of
Developments Within / 205
the Pertya nadu. It may however be emphasized that the Periya
nadu was a different kind of organization meant to serve as a
guild of agriculturists, or, more correctly, of dealers in agricul-
tural commodities, a development of great significance in the
urban activities of medieval Tamil Nadu. Hall’s study of the
economy of Kafcipuram is, on the other hand, of greater interest
to urban historians, for it provides some comparisons between
urban experiences in medieval South India and medieval north-
ern Europe.
This essay aims to identify some areas of fruitful research
and promising lines of investigation in relation to urban proces-
ses in medieval Tamil Nadu. Two major periods of urbanization
can be recognized in Tamil Nadu, the first coinciding with the
early centuries of the Christian era, 1.e. the Sangam period, and
the second with the period of Colas, 1.e. from the ninth to the
thirteenth centuries aD. The intervening period provides through
fairly large-scale agrarian expansion the basis for the growth of
urban centres in the Cola period. These two periods represent
different kinds of urban experience, characteristic respectively
of a tribal society in the process of development and an agrarian
society with well organized institutions.
The predominant factor in the urbanization of the Sangam
period would appear to be maritime trade,’ in which the early
chiefdoms actively participated. (There is a need to rethink the
nature of the polities of the Sangam Ceras, Colas and Pandyas,
which may at best be described as chiefdoms or potential
monarchies—although the term Vendar used in Sangam works
for rulers has been interpreted as ‘kings’). The decline in overseas
trade led to the decline of urban centres, most of which were
ports or emporia of trade. It also partially explains the sudden
disappearance of the early chiefdoms.
Early medieval South India, Tamil Nadu in particular, pro-
vides a conspicuous example of rural-urban continuum without
a clearcut demarcation of rural-urban boundaries. In this context
it is relevant to raise certain crucial questions relating to pre-
industrial societies. For example, what are the links between
agricultural production and urban growth and the degree to
which agricultural growth and the availability of a surplus 1s a
necessary precondition to urban development? Does an increase
206 / Trade. Ideology and Urbanization
in commerce and overseas trade, and the consequent emergence
of centres of commodity exchange or an entrepot market,
stimulate agricultural production? To what extent do towns
develop as centres of commodity production or distribution
centres in relation to the internal economy, as opposed to the
growth of towns in response to the demands of overseas trade?
In the South Indian context, answers to these questions may
be sought first in the agrarian development which preceded and
continued through the Cola period. In the pre-Cola period,
Pallava dominance over the region north of the Kaveri and the
revival of Pandya power in Madurai (sixth to ninth centuries AD)
marked a major shift in agrarian organization through the
introduction of new elements as integrative forces, namely, the
brahmadeya and the temple. Land grants to brahbmanas (brab
madeyas) and the (devadanas) by ruling classes (and subsequently
by socially important groups like the vélala landowners) were
initiated by the Pallavas and Pandyas, marking the extension of
cultivation, an increase in agricultural activities, and a more
intensive agrarian organization. This was followed by the emer-
gence of trade centres, initially in key areas, leading subsequently
to the evolution in the Cola period of a network of such centres
dependent on a degree of agrarian expansion.
A further step towards this process was the development of
organized trade through merchant guilds, specialization in the
marketing of specific local commodities through the naguram,
and exotic and luxury goods through itinerant guilds. Trade
and commercial activity were consciously promoted by royal
policy through conquests, the development of ports, and the
encouragement of production centres and guild activity. In
response to this constant demand and encouragement, special-
ization of crafts followed and production centres catering to an
expanding market—internal and external—through organized
commerce, emerged. A conspicuous shift in the emphasis from
agricultural to non-agricultural economic activities and com-
mercial agriculture in some centres was also a part of this
process.
Urban growth in the Cola period relates mainly to the
expansion of existing rural settlements. Clusters of such settle-
ments emerged in the core areas or delta regions, forming the
. Developments Within / 207
nucle of medieval kingdoms. They may be described as ‘plu-
ralistic’ settlements, with several temples as centres of different
socio-religious groups pursuing various economic activities.
The temple as the institutional base for socio-economic and
political integration assumes great significance from the period
of the Bhakti Movement (seventh to ninth centuries aD).6 Under
the Colas someo f the bhakti centres became leading political,
sacred or pilgrimage centres and evolved into huge urban
complexes, either around a single large temple or with multiple
temples together forming parts of an urban complex. Such
temples were built by the major ruling dynasties and their
subordinates, either to legitimize their sovereignty or to bring
various socio-economic groups within the orbit of bhakt: centres.
Temples became landed magnates, with tenants and temple
servants remunerated through land. They also received gold and
money endowments from the ninth century and invested such
grants again in land, or occasionally in trade.
The growth in the economic activities of such temples led to
urban development. There was also a corresponding expansion
in the architectural structure of the temple from a small nuclear
shrine into huge horizontal temple complexes with several
enclosures and towering gateways, encompassing many shrines,
halls of educational and cultural activities, hospitals, and monas-
tic establishments with lineages of religious heads controlling
temple administration.
The rural-urban continuum is best illustrated by such centres,
which had a dependable hinterland where agricultural output
was assuredly above subsistence level. The trade in agricultural
commodities and local goods as well as luxuries and exotic items
from distant lands that such centres attracted must be seen as
a complementary factor in this development. The demand
generated by the local elite and the temple for locally unavailable
goods brought itinerant trade to these markets and encouraged
the large-scale settlement of craftsmen and artisans, who were
eventually accommodated in the temple centre.
The process was slow and spread over a span of four centuries.
Thus, initially one could look for urban growth among core
regions where clusters of brahmadeyas and dévadanas emerged
(Table II, pp. 258-9). One oft he leading examples of such urban
208 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
growth is Kudamikku-Palaiyarai, the residential capital and twin
city of the Colas.’ 39
This twin city came up on the banks of the Arisilaru and
Mudikondan, distributaries in the Kaveri delta (See Map 10),
which was the resource base of the Colas both in the early
period (the second century Bc to the second century AD) and
later, when they re-emerged as the most powerful South Indian
dynasty in the ninth century. The resource potential of this
region is indicated by the numerous peasant settlements dating
from the early historical period and also by the tendency of
early brahmadeyas to cluster together and proliferate rapidly in
this area. Statistical data shows that the brahmadeyas were densest
around Kumbhakonam (ancient Kudamutkku). During the
seventh to the ninth centuries the Pallavas and Pandyas at-
tempted to colonize the Kaveri delta through brahmadeyas and,
in the process, were drawn into a series of armed conflicts with
each other, before the re-emergence of the Colas with the same
region as their nucleus. The river system in the delta was carefully
built up into an irrigation network from the ninth century by
the Colas, and thus came to represent a rich source of revenue,
with a large surplus capable of supporting a major concentration
of population. The foundation of Tanjavar and Gangaikonda-
colapuram as the capitals was perhaps determined by Cola
anxiety to protect this resource base.
Two early magarams called Tiraimtr and Kumaramarttanda-
puram served as market centres for this region after the ninth
century, apart from a colony of merchants called Nandipuram
in Palatyarai. Kudamukku represented the religious or sacred
complex and Palaiyarai the palace complex. In both the com-
plexes, temples came up at different points of time between the
ninth and thirteenth centuries, each with a settlement around
it, akin to a modern colony in a large city.
The major economic activities centring around these temples
are reflected through endowments in the form of land, cows,
goats, gold, and money for a variety of purposes such as religious
festivals, the feeding of brahmanas and other ascetics, the burning
of lamps, reconstruction and renovation of temple structures,
ornaments to the deities, religious discourses, and educational
institutions. The temples had their treasuries, archives and
Developments Within / 209
administrative machinery usually controlled by the landed
groups, particularly brabmanas and high-caste non-brahmanas or
velalas.
The social groups involved in these activities were members
of the royal family, Cola officials of high rank, palace servants,
personal retinues of the royal members, members of elephant
corps, leading landowners from other parts of the Cola king-
dom, local merchants, horse traders from the distant Kerala
region, merchants from other districts of Tamil Nadu and the
itinerant merchant guilds. In order to look after the temple’s
movable property, such as cows and goats, there was a special
class of shepherds called manradis. The Karkkolas (part-time
soldiers and weavers) were another important community in-
volved in the gift-making processes.
Gifts of land came mainly from the landowning groups, while
gold and monetary gifts came more often from merchants, local
and itinerant. Coined money as a medium of exchange became
regular from the tenth century onwards. The Cola mint was
located in Kudamukku.
With intensive architectural and sculptural activity between
the ninth and thirteenth centuries, regular colonies of architects
and sculptors must have existed here throughoutth e Cola period
and after. Two of the major industries of the Cola period,
metalware and textiles, were located in this complex. Apart from
the making of copper and brass vessels, the ritual needs of the
temples led to the evolution of a big centre for the art of casting
bronze images for the temples, a craft in which Cola artists
achieved unparalleled skill and excellence. To this day the
Kumbhakonam region remains a major centre of bronze-casting
and vessel-making. Weaving was the second major industry and
was so renowned that in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries
weavers from Saurashtra (western India) migrated and settled in
Kumbhakonam.
_ With the decline of the Colas, the administrative and politi-
cal importance of the city as a nerve centre of Cola administra-
tion also declined, and Palaiyarai, or the palace or residential
complex, disintegrated into small villages and hamlets which
are at present suburbs of modern Kumbhakonam, a taluk
headquarters. In the post-Cola period, Kumbhakonam survived
210 / Trade, Tdeology and Urbanization
as an urban centre due largely to its continuance as a sacred
centre.
Apart from the core region of the Colas, situations of a
similar nature led to urban growth in other areas, although the
pace and extent of growth differed in various degrees.
Two major brahmadeyas of the Tirunelveli district became
the nuclei of a huge urban complex with the occupation of
the Pandya country by the imperial Colas in the eleventh
century. Rajarajacaturvédimangalam, the present Mannarkoyil,
which grew around a Visnu temple built early in the eleventh
century by the Céra subordinate of the Colas,® developed into
an urban centre by the beginning of the twelfth century. The
present Tiruvalisvaram’ and Ambasamudram (Ilangoykkudi),"°
north and south of Mannarkoyil respectively, were also parts
of this centre. In Brahmadesam, east of Mannarkoyil, one may
recognize its origin as a brahmadeya. Rajéndracolapuram was
the first magaram or marketing centre of this urban complex
and dates from the period of Rayéndra I (1018-44), after whom
it was named."' The Cola-Pandya viceroys had their residential
quarters in Rajéndracolapuram.'* A second magaram called
Vindanur also came up by the twelfth century in the vicinity
of Mannarkoyil.'’? Merchants from the Kumbhakonam region,
i.e. from the distant town of Kumaramarttandapuram™ and
the itinerant merchant guild called the Nanadesi Tisai Ayirattu
Ainfurruvar’’ participated in the trade and commercial ac-
tivities of this city from the eleventh century onwards.
The Siva temple at Tiruvalisvaram was entrusted to the care
of the Cola army called Munrukat Mahasenai,'* a feature of great
significance in temple management and protection, when con-
sidered along with the fact that Tiruvalisvaram acquired the
status of an Erivirappattana,'’? a merchant town protected by
armed troops.
The part played by the Golaki matha in the urban develop-
ment of Tiruvalisvaram in the thirteenth century was no less
important,'® for such mathas attracted itinerant trade on account
of their organizational network."
Lying between the Tamraparni and Gatana rivers (called Mudi-
kondacolappéraru and Rajarajappéraru in Cola inscriptions)”
the Mannarkoyil urban centre is located in the picturesque
Developments Within / 211
amphitheatre that descends from the Podiyil hills commanding
entry into the Pandya country from the Céra land (Kerala) (See
Map 8). The whole area between the two rivers forms a rich
agricultural tract, which the Colas selected as their base in the
Pandya region, creating new brahbmadeyas and magarams. The size
of this urban complex was about 6.44 kilometres/4.83 kilo-
metres,”’ comparable to the Kudamukku complex in the core of
the Cola heartland.
Further east was Céravanmadeévicaturvédimangalam (Sérma-
devi) on the south bank of the Tamraparni, dating back to the
period of Rajaraja I (985-1014), with a concentration of small
settlements around it, linked to the main brahmadeya. Among
its more important hamlets are Karisulndamangalam or Kailasa-
mangalam or Ten Tiruvéngadam” and Pattalmadai,” with huge
Visnu temples in addition to the major Visnu and Siva temples
of the main centre. The nagaram of Rajéndracolapuram with its
palace also served as the major market centre of this region
from the eleventh century.”*
The merchant corporation of the Five Hundred patronized
the Visnu temple of Nigarilicola Vinnagaram in this centre.”
Kakikkola and Saliya weavers and terinda-kaikkola army men,
sculptors and merchants, both local and from other towns, were
among the many socio-economic groups involved in the com-
mercial activities of this centre.” Saiva and Vaisnava mathas”’
and a Sarasvati bhandara or library attached to one oft he Visnu
temples”® are the other institutional forces which contributed
to the urban growth of this centre in the twelfth-thirteenth
centuries.
The location of the Cola palace in this region and the
concerted efforts of the Colas towards the development of the
region in the eleventh century would seem to have been greatly
influenced by their trade policy, as also their interests, which
are visibly heightened in this period,” in the northern part of
Sri Lanka.
Madurantakam (Madurantakacaturvedimangalam) in Chingle-
put district became the nucleus of an urban centre from the time
of Parantaka I (907-55), its various quarters developing around
Vaisnava and Saiva temples built by the imperial Colas in the
tenth-eleventh centuries.” It acquired several hamlets through
212 / Trade, Tdealogy and Urbanization
endowments?! and a market called Viracolappérangadi.” In com-
parison with the huge urban complexes in the core region of
the Colas and Pandyas of the eleventh-twelfth centuries, this
centre appears to be a small town. Nonetheless, urban features
were present in varying degrees in several such small towns, many
of which attained the status of a tantyar (tan-kurn)’?’ due to an
increase in size, population and economic functions (Table III,
pp. 260-3). Madurantakam was a taniyur in Kalattur Kottam.
Uttiramérir, an early brabmadeya, also acquired the status of a
taniyur in Kaliyar-Kéttam by the tenth century.’ Ennayiram
(also called BrahmadeSam) and Tribhuvani (Tribhuvanamadevi
caturvedimangalam)® in South Arcot district also belong to the
same category. The former had a huge Vedic college and a hostel
attached to the temple, which attracted Valanjiyar merchants,
who traded in articles required by the hostel in return for money
deposited with them.*® Tirukkalukkunram, also a taniyur in
Kalattur Kottam with three temples—one of which dates from
Pallava times—had its own magaram or marketing centre by the
eleventh century.*’
Bahur (Vagur or Alagiyacodla Caturvédimangalam) in Pondi-
chery, Udaiyarkudi, Villupuram (Jananatha Caturvédimangalam)
and Chidambaram, all in South Arcot district, and Tiruvanna-
malai in North Arcot district, are some of the other tanzyars of
the Cola period.** They became fairly numerous from the middle
Cola period and had dependable hinterlands to meet the de-
mands of a sizeable town and an occasionally mobile population.
A major consequence of the earlier agrarian expansion of the
seventh-ninth centuries was an increase in commercial activity
after the ninth century. Large-scale commercial activity was
confined to a few areas in the pre-Cola period. Kacci of the
Sangam period assumes the role of the premier city in South
India from Pallava times, both as a seat of political power and
as the largest textile production and commercial centre, apart
from its character as a Ghatikasthana or seat of learning. It
became a sacred centre by acquiring, both under the Pallavas
and Colas, a large number of Saiva and Vaisnava temples. Kacci
was sanskritized into Kaficipura and Kaficimanagara, the latter
nomenclature being indicative of its commercial growth into a
great or more prestigious market.
Developments Within / 213
Such a mdnagaram more often owed its creation to state
sponsorship than did a mere magaram or market centre.“ The
other managaram of the Pallavas was the port of Mamallapuram
on the coast (Table IV, pp. 264-87). Both acted as centres of a
large network of maritime commerce which connected Tondai-
mandalam with the outside world. While Mamallapuram is on
the coast, Kaficipuram’s location on the banks of the Veghavati
(a tributary of the Palar) provided easy access to the port of
Mamallapuram, as also to Vayalir, another important Pallava
centre on the coast at the mouth of the Palar.
Using the networks and centres model in his study of the
nagaram as a market centre in South India in the Pallava-Cola
period, Hall has argued that Kafici’s economic growth was also
linked to the development of inland commerce, in which it
played a dominant role.*’ This model, derived from that of
Skinner for rural China, suggests the existence of market centres
(i.e. magaram) serving networks of villages, i.e. the magaram as
a well developed system even in the Pallava period, with
Kaficipuram as a mdnagaram at the apex of a pyramid of
different levels of exchange. This system, according to Hall,
linked the villages with market centres or nagaram, and the
nagaram in turn with managaram. However, there is no clear
evidence of such a link in the Pallava period, for the earliest
datable reference to a nagaram, which served as the nuclear
marketing centre of the agrarian unit called the madu (which
was its local marketing territory) is of the early Cola period
in the tenth century. In Pallava inscriptions very few nagarams
are met with and their relation to the pastoral-agrarian unit
called kottam of the Pallava period cannot be ascertained. In
all, there are four nagarams (Table IV, pp. 264-87) known from
Pallava inscriptions, apart from Kafici and Mamallapuram as
managarams, namely Virificipuram in North Arcot district on
the south bank of the Palar (Seruvalaimangalam in inscriptions)
of the eighth century,” Tiruvadigai near Cuddalore on the
coast in South Arcot district of the late ninth century,” Kilur
(Tirukk6valir) in South Arcot district, an inland market centre
on the banks of the Ponnatyar,”“ and TirunageSvaram (Kumara-
marttandapuram in inscriptions)* in Tanjavur district on the
banks of the Arisil, a distributory in the Kaveri delta. Twenty
214 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
four kattams are traditionally assigned to the Tondaimandalam
or Pallava region,“ of which only a few are known from Pallava
records. Such a network-centre model is hence not useful in
the context of the Pallava period. On the other hand, Hall’s
study of the nagaram of the Cola period is consistent with
this marketing system, into which the itinerant merchant guilds
were drawn from the eleventh century onwards. Itinerant mer-
chant guilds which traded with Southeast Asia and Sri Lanka
are visible in the Pallava records only in the ninth century.
The Manigramam* is the only such guild known to Pallava
inscriptions and from Takua Pa on the Isthmus of Kra in
Southeast Asia.”
Kaficipuram became a secondary political centre under the
Colas, but its commercial character continued as before. Even
when it lost its importance as a political centre at the end of
the Cola period, its sacred character has helped to retain its
vitality as a commercial centre down to modern times. Mamal-
lapuram was superseded by Nagapattinam as the chief port of
the Colas. Yet it continued to be a part of the huge commercial
network till about the thirteenth century.
The nagarams of Tiruvadi, Tirukkévalir (Kilur) and Virifici-
puram continued as market centres under the Colas. In addition,
their sacred and political associations kept alive their urban
character even beyond the Cola period.
The emergence and proliferation of the magaram kept pace
with the increase in commercial activity under the Colas (Table
IV, pp. 264-87). The pattern of their distribution led Hall to
treat them as marketing centres, a maximum of one per
nadu, each nadu serving as the local marketing territory for
the magaram.”” While this appears to be generally true, there
is evidence of more than one magaram in some nadus,° which
may perhaps be attributed to a greater density of settlements
in those nddus. Eventually, the nagarams became points of
intersection for the exchange of local goods with exotic and
locally unavailable goods in which the itinerant merchant
corporations traded. Thus, the magarams were brought into a
wider network of international trade. Hall’s model of networks-
centres links the villages of the madu to the mnagaram, the
nagaram in turn to ‘the higher marketing centres’ or trade
Developments Within / 215
centres called erivirappattinam and managaram, where the
guilds, it is suggested, controlled a major part of the trade and
commercial activity.*' The suggestion of a hierarchy of relation-
ships implied in this network model cannot be overlooked
and needs to be more closely examined. Further, commerce in
the mdnagarams was organized and controlled by the local
nagaram members rather than by itinerant merchant groups.
Nagarams undoubtedly represented potential centres of urban
growth. It must, however, be emphasized that not all nagarams
became huge urban centres, nor were they consistently drawn
into this network of inter-regional and overseas trade irrespec-
tive of their location. Most of them were no more than a
common market for the nadu villages and helped in the
exchange only of local goods. Some, like Tafjavur, had powerful
nagaram organizations” over which the itinerant traders had
no influence. In a few places, where the demand for goods to
and from distant regions created a market for the itinerant
merchant groups traversing parts of South India irrespective
of political boundaries, the urban growth was rapid and at
times phenomenal.
The history of the zagaram shows that at least three major
phases of its activity can be demarcated in the Cola period (see
Table IV, pp. 264-87), corresponding to the early (850-985),
middle (985-1150) and late Cola periods (1150-1279). The role
of the magaram comes into sharp focus in the reign of Paran-
taka I (907-55) with a visible change in the medium of religious
gifts to metal (gold and silver) and money, in addition to land
and cattle (including goats), and in the quantity of such gifts
in the early Cola period, compared to the earlier and later
periods. Gold and other expensive gifts increase in the middle
Cola period, i.e. under Rajaraja I, Rajendra I and Kulottunga I
(between 985 and 1120), but dwindle considerably in the late
Cola period. Invariably, such gifts came from rulers, elite groups
and nagaram members.
The evidence of Cola numismatics is not beyond dispute
regarding the identification and attribution of coin issues, yet
the beginnings of regular coinage are assignable to the early
Cola period, particularly to Parantaka I, whose inscriptions
abound in reference to gold and silver coins.’ A partial
216 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
monetization of the economy from this period contributed to
a greater involvement of the nagaram in commercial ventures.
Contacts with the larger mercantile organizations 1s as yet
minimal in the delta region and more clearly visible only in
certain areas like Pudukkottai, Salem, Uraiyur, the north western
parts Tiruchirapalli district, Tirunelveli district and South Arcot
—i.e. the peripheral regions and route areas.” As yet there is
also no clear evidence of a deliberate royal policy directed
towards active encouragement of overseas trade or the develop-
ment of new ports. Kavérippattinam seems to have continued
to be the major outlet for Cola commerce.
The middle Cola period is marked by a conspicuous increase
in nagarams, which now cover not only the whole of the Cola
heartland but also appear in areas giving access to powerful
neighbouring kingdoms and in areas newly conquered by the
Colas. In consolidating their conquests the Colas not merely
renamed the conquered areas, as for example Gangavadi into
Mudikondacolamandalam, but also founded brahmadeyas and
nagarams such as Mudikondacolapuram (after Rajéndra 1),°°
Nigarilicdlapuram (after Rajaraja 1)*’ and Rajéndracolapuram
(after Rajendra I),°* after the conquest of the Ganga and Pandya
regions. This was a practice followed right through the Cola
period, particularly in the reigns of Kuléttunga I and Vikrama
Cola—a period of constant movement of Cola troops into
Karnataka and Andhra. Thus, the magarams were used as much
as the brahmadeya as interdependent agents of political synthesis
under the Colas.
As a result, the magarams became part of a wider network of
inter-regional and overseas trade from the eleventh century, with
enhanced political influence in areas of crucial links. Erivira-
ppattanas, or chartered mercantile towns, also begin to appear
only from the eleventh century (Table VI, pp. 291-303), point-
ing to the need for creating protected warehouses for merchant
groups.on major trade routes.
_ The pattern of nagaram distribution shows only a marginal
increase in the late Cola period in the areas controlled by the
Colas, whereas with the re-establishment of Pandya power early
in the thirteenth century, new nagarams emerged in the Madu-
rat, Ramanathapuram and Tirunelveli districts. This helped to
Developments Within J 217
intensify to a large extent commercial ventures and itinerant
trade in the southern region.
A second important development in the middle Cola period
due to increased commercial activity relates to specialization
in marketing and trade. While nagaram refers merely to an
organization of local merchants, the increasing specialization
in marketing led to the rise of special merchant organizations—
such as the Saliya Nagarattar® for marketing textiles and
Sankarappadi Nagarattar®' for supplying oil and ghee—whose
activities seem to have been confined to a specific locality. In
both cases, the magaram would appear to be composed of
people who had been practising professions like weaving and
oil-producing, but who had turned into merchants. Similar
groups like the Sattum Parisatta Nagaram™ and Paraga Naga-
ram® refer to organized suppliers of cloth and seafaring mer-
chants (Table IV, last column, pp. 264-87).
The Vantya Nagaram,™ also dealing in oil, was a wider
organization of oil-mongers, which, like the larger merchant
organizations, seems to have been composed of merchants from
various regions, frequently referred to as Vaniya Nagarattar of
the eighteen Visaya (regions).© They often figure conspicuously,
along with other merchant organizations, in inscriptions grant-
ing maganmait (tolls) to temples, particularly in the thirteenth
and fourteenth centuries (Table VI, pp. 291-303). They are
comparable to the Teliki of Vijayavada, a huge organization of
oil merchants known from the close of the eleventh century in
the Andhra region.”
Horse trading was yet another specialized occupation and
was entirely in the hands of merchants from Malaimandalam
(Kerala) throughout the medieval period. Arab trade in horses
was conducted mainly through the western ports and the Colas
depended on Kerala merchants to procure and transport them
into the Tamil areas. Settlements of people from Malaimanda-
lam known as Malaiyalangudi existed in the heart of the Cola
country” and in the Pudukkottai region (Table V, pp. 288-90).”°
Even Parasikas (Persians) figure in a Gangaikondacolapuram
inscription of Kulottunga I.”!
The nagaram organizations and specialization in the market-
ing of specific commodities thus proved to be a major factor
218 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
‘n the urbanization of the eleventh-thirteenth centuries, and 1s
often characterized as ‘temple urbanization’, for the temples,
particularly the large ones, were the biggest consumers, apart
from the ruling classes, of goods both local and foreign. The
simultaneous appearance of a large number of diverse occupa-
tional groups, i.e. non-agricultural groups, in such centres
resulted in an elaboration of the temple town, with separate
quarters for merchants, artisans and weavers 1n particular, most
of whom were accommodated in the 7irumadaivilagam of the
temple.” The highly complex social stratification of the twelfth-
thirteenth centuries, with the dual division of the Right and
Left Hand castes—distinct from the brahmana and high-caste
non-brahmana (or Velala) groups—would seem to be another
notable feature of this urbanization. This division has baffled
all attempts at a clear definition of caste groupings, but its
connection with the emergence of specialized crafts and artisan
groups is undeniable.
Traders, individually and collectively, are mentioned in in-
scriptions throughout the Cola period. Organized trade, espe-
cially long-distance trade, can be dated from the ninth century.
The Pudukkottai region (Munisandai) of Tamil Nadu was in-
volved in this trade for the first time through the Ayyavole guild,
known to Tamil inscriptions variously as the Aifftrruvur or
Nanadesiya Tisai Ayirattu Aiffurruvur (the Five Hundred of
the thousand directions of several countries).’? The Manigramam
of Kodumbalir (also in Pudukkottai) and Uraiyar (Tiruchirapal-
li) is another group which, like the Five Hundred, conducted
organized trade in the early Cola period.” The Valanyiyar is the
third such organization seemingly a militant component of the
larger itinerant organization/corporation, seen in the Cola coun-
try from at least the tenth country.”* The area covered by their
movement was initially confined to the peripheral districts of
Pudukkottai, the western part of Tiruchirappalli and Tirunelveli,
and by the middle Cola period their activities extended over the
whole of Tamil Nadu (Table VI, pp. 291-303), although a con-
centration of the Five Hundred and Manigramam inscriptions
is still to be found in the Pudukkottai region, marking a major
trade route. It is also at this point, as mentioned earlier, that the
Erivirappattanas begin to appear.
Developments Within / 219
Erivirappattanas (Table II, IV, VI, last columns, pp. 258ff)
have been described as ‘inland ports’ and are believed to have
come up only in remote and inhospitable areas.”° This view is
based on the fact that the Ramanathapuram region has been
classified as a tribal area, where the martial tribe of Maravars
was predominant even from the Sangam age. It would, however,
be more correct to look at these as centres on trade routes used
as warehouses by itinerant merchants. These merchants often
had such centres converted into specially protected warehouses
with royal sanction—or sometimes on their own, in the absence
of a recognizable political overlord—and defended them with
their own troops. ‘Erivira’, which Hall interprets as ‘heroes of
the road’, has earlier been translated as ‘mercenary soldiers armed
with spears’,” and, hence, is associated with armed protection.
The militant character of these merchant guilds, whose caravans
moved with armed protection, is well attested to by epigraphic
references to their use of force in some centres.”* Erivirappattanas
on such trade routes were Basitnikonda (Siravalli) in Chittoor
district,” Aiyapolil Kattur (Chingleput district), Tirumalagan-
darkottai (Ramanathapuram district),*! and Vikramacdlapuram
(eleventh-century Vémbatti, Coimbatore district).** The reference
to an Erivirappattana in Tirunelveli district is particularly
significant as it was part of a large urban settlement where the
temple, its treasury and temple servants had been placed under
the protection of the army called Munrukai Mahasénai,™ taken
to be the Cola army stationed there after the Pandya country
was conquered and placed under Cola-Pandya viceroys.
In the period of Kulottunga I and Vikrama Cola (1070-1133)
the guild activities extended to the Andhra region, with new
avenues of trade linking Andhra ports like Kulottunga Colan
pattinam (Visakhappattinam), Colapandya pattinam (Ghanta-
sala) and Dési Uyyakkonda pattana (later Motupalli).” Almost
simultaneously, the Citraméli Periyanadu, an organization of
Tamil agriculturists, also makes its appearance in Andhra and
Karnataka.”
In the late Céla period and under the later Pandyas, 1.e. in
the late twelfth, thirteenth and early fourteenth centuries, not
only do we find a phenomenal increase in their activity but also
an attempt to acquire greater control over the movement of
220 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
goods by the different merchant bodies coming together and
jointly fixing the rates of maganmai (tolls) and pattanappagud:
(the share of the town) (Table VI, last column, pp. 291-303).”
Invariably, the inscriptions recording such joint decisions are
found in coastal towns other than those directly controlled by
the royal families, but which later assumed importance due to
the absence of any single political authority.
More important, however, is the association of the Citrameli
Periyanadu with other merchant bodies (Table VI, pp. 291-303),
where the Citraméli organization seems to assume a position
of primacy in the decision-making process. The joint prasasti
(eulogy) evolved by them for such occasions gives the place of
importance to this organization by mentioning it at the head
of the prasasti.8® The Citraméli organization of agriculturists
dates from the middle-Cola times®? but is hardly mentioned
together with other groups till the thirteenth century. In fact
all these organizations acted only in their independent capacity
and also as mere participants in gift-making, temple-building
and allied functions associated with donors. The right of fixing
the tolls, commission, share of the town, etc. was exercised by
them only in‘a joint capacity, and, more conspicuously, towards
the close of the Cola period when royal authority became
virtually ineffective in regions beyond the core area. The Vaniya
Nagarattar, Manigramam, Afjuvannam and Samanta Pandasalis
were also involved in such joint donations out of the income
from taxes on import and exports.” This in effect represents
the institutionalization of the relationship between different
bodies which acted independently at first and later in a joint
capacity. Their common eulogy is the first known expression
oft he ascendancy oft rading groups in a predominantly agrarian
society.
_ The composition of some of these organizations makes an
interesting study. Recent work on the Ayyavole guild has shown
that such guilds were controlled not by any one religious
community but various groups, including the agrahara brab-
manas, who were either collectively or individually landowners.”
Similarly the Citrameéli Periyanadu, which originated in Tamil
Nadu and later extended its activities to other parts of South
India, was evidently an organization of landowners drawn from
is Developments Within / 221
various social groups and which wielded great economic and
political influence from the twelfth century onwards. Consisting
of many non-brahmana landlords (Vélalas), this body, as seen
above, joined with merchant guilds in controlling trade in
certain areas, particularly urban centres. In addition to textiles,
fragrant woods, spices, incense, etc., in which the merchant
guilds traded, a number of agricultural commodities are also
found mentioned in inscriptions referring to both these or-
ganizations.” There is some indication that the agricultural
surplus was mobilized and brought from rural areas to urban
settlements through magaram members. Presumably, the Citra-
meéli were in control of this movement by virtue oft heir position
as grain dealers at the centres where merchant bodies met. The
marked development of such centres from the twelfth century
would indicate that mobilization of agricultural surplus made
possible the expansion of urban activities.
A significant change in the pattern of land ownership may
also be perceived from the twelfth century, when non-agricul-
tural groups figure more prominently in the control of land,
exercising, at the same time, commercial influence. The rise in
the power of these landowning groups, such as the weavers
(Katkkolas) and merchants, apart from the Vélalas, also indicates
a greater sharing of authority between brahmana and non-
brahmana caste groups and increasing social mobility, as opposed
to the dominance of brahmanas and a small ruling elite in the
earlier period.
The revival in South India of long-distance trade in the
tenth century as part of the increase in South Asian trade,
involved not only the merchant guilds but considerably in-
fluenced the external policy of the Colas. The Cola wars in
South Karnataka may be described as an attempt to establish
trade links and to control the major trade route between
Karnataka and Tamil Nadu, facilitating the easy movement of
the Ayyavole or NanadeSis. Their attacks on northern Sri Lanka
and their occupation of it for nearly eight decades in the
eleventh century, were not mere pillaging or plundering attacks,
as held by Spencer,” but a deliberate policy of encouraging
new trade ventures by enabling already existing pockets of
Tamil culture dominated by merchants to engage in lucrative
222 , Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
commercial ventures. Presumably, mutual benefit rather than
tight political control over trade and trading communities was
the motivating force behind such ventures. The same motive
led to the two major maritime expeditions of Rajendra I and
Kuldttunga I in Southeast Asia ending up in Srivijaya,”* ob-
viously to,establish trading rights in these regions, and over
the much coveted Isthmus of Kra to reach China. Cola missions
to China in the eleventh century and Kulottunga’s physical
presence in Cambodia, his coins,” exchange of gifts—including
the ‘tribute missions’ mentioned in the smaller Leiden Grant,
grants of lands and villages to the Buddhist whara at Na-
gappattinam,” and the abolition of tolls,” are all part of the
trade policy of this early medieval dynasty. It 1s significant
that in the wake of these military expeditions the South Indian
trade guilds begin to appear in Burma, Malaysia, and Java.
The recent excavations in Takua Pa indicate a great deal of
Tamil influence between the ninth and twelfth centuries. Recent
work on the dynamics of South Asian trade shows that trade
overtures or agreements acquired some form of legitimacy
through religious donations to temples and wharas. This is
clearly illustrated in the elaboration of the port of Naga-
ppattinam, where a Buddhist vihara of considerable size and
importance was erected by the Sailéndra king. To this wihara
the Cola rulers made liberal endowments in the eleventh
century.” Earlier, Nagappattinam is known through literary
references as a bhakti centre of the Saiva and Vaisnava creeds.
It was drawn into the huge network of overseas trade with the
active trade policy of Rajaraja I and Rajéndra, and later
Kulottunga I in the eleventh-twelfth centuries. The persistence
of Buddhist influence in Nagappattinam—particularly the
Theravada influence—in the eleventh-twelfth centuries may be
attributed to the trade relationships of Southeast Asian coun-
tries with the South Coromandel coast. Through Srivijaya, first
China and later Burma and Sri Lanka were involved in this
activity. Reference has been made to the tribute missions from
Southeast Asian islands. Chinese gold came into the port in
the eleventh century through the agents of the Srivijaya kings.”
At least three hoards of Chinese copper coins ranging in date
from 142 Bc to AD 1252 have been found in the Pattukkottai
Developments Within rs 2235
taluk of Tanjavur district." Cola missions to China during
the period of Rajéndra I and Kulottunga I are recorded in
Chinese annals.'”
With Kulottunga’s accession to the Cola throne, much of
the trade in the Andhra region was also regulated by the Cola
kings through the itinerant guilds. Visakhapattinam, also called
Kulottunga Colan pattinam, became a leading port, where the
Ayyavole acted jointly with the Anjuvannam!’™” or Arab mer-
chant organization which is known to have traded even in the
ninth century on the Kerala coast.'* Tamil merchants settled
in Andhra ports and visited other interior trade centres.'™
State patronage of the Ayyavole and other major guilds is
increasingly attested to by several inscriptions of the Colas and
Pandyas, and oral traditions refers to a specific invitation by
the Pandyas to a Vaisya community, which was part of the guild,
to settle in their kingdom.'®
The location of some regions such as Pudukkottai-Rama-
nathapuram and Salem-Coimbatore, facilitating trade routes,
was a stimulant to urbanization. The Pudukkottai region, which
was a buffer between the Cola Pandya heartlands, assumed great
significance from the tenth century, when the Colas entered
into a close alliance through matrimonial ties with the Irukkuvel
chiefs of Kodumbalir'® tn order to gain control over the trade
that passed through it to Sri Lanka, and also to extend political
control over Madurai and the surrounding region. Being a buffer
zone between the Colas and Pandyas, the major battles between
these two powers were fought in or on the outskirts of this
region. Its commercial importance in the earlier Sangam age 1s
recognized through numismatic and epigraphic evidence, such
as the hoard of Roman coins probably deposited there in the
late-first or early-second century ap,'” and the early Tamil
Brahmi inscriptions in Sittannavasal in the Pudukkottai district.
Sittannavasal was a major centre of the Jains,'® and the pattern
of distribution of early Jain centres’ shows that they tended
to be located along old trade routes.
In this region commerce was not directly linked with a
concentration of population and the generation of local demand
for goods from outside, nor with the development of a regular
exchange system as in the rich Kaveri valley. The major factor
224 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
in its commercial importance was its access to the coastal towns
through which trade between South India and other countries
was carried on. The nearby port of Tondi received in the early
period products such as aloeswood, silk and sandal, which are
known from the same region even as late as in the thirteenth
century under the Pandyas.'!° The Manigramam of Kavérippum-
pattinam migrated and settled in this region around the tenth
to eleventh centuries, perhaps due to the supersession of Kaveri-
ppumpattinam by other Cola ports. The marked increase in
commerce from the tenth to the thirteenth centuries is reflected
in their activity as well as that of the Ayyavole or Aiffurruvur
guild, both of which appeared here around the tenth century
and became extremely active in the Pudukkottai and Rama-
nathapuram areas, the latter being known as Chettinad in
modern times.
Kodumbalur (Table IV, pp. 264-87) was a magaram of con-
siderable size, where the Manigramam was active,'"! apart from
being the political or administrative centre of the Irukkuvels of
Konadu. Narttamalai or Nagarattarmalai (Table IV, pp. 264-87)
on the way to Kodumbalur was a major nagaram with which
the Tisai Ayirattu Aiffurruvur, or the merchant corporation of
the Five Hundred, had active links in the eleventh century.'!
South of Pudukkottai in Ramanathapuram district two major
centres of merchant activity were Kamudi and Piranmalai
(Table VI, pp. 291-303), where, in the tenth and thirteenth
centuries, members of several merchant organizations met and
recorded their endowments to the local deities in a joint
donation.'’* In both the records reference is made to 18
pattinams, 32 valarpurams (vélarpuram) and 64 kadigaittavalams
from which members hailed. While a few of these places can
be identified with well-known towns, quite a large number of
them cannot be located. Tavalam would seem to represent a
fair, while pattinam was undoubtedly a town of considerable
commercial importance and more often a port. Valarpuram
would perhaps be a growing trade centre.
In the twelfth-thirteenth centuries the merchant corporation
of the Five Hundred and the Valafijiyar of Sri Lanka are seen
making endowments at the temples of Sivapuri, Tirunelvéli
and Aruppukkottai, and also in the Ramanathapuram district
Developments Within / 225
(Table VI, pp. 291-303) during the period of the Pandyas,''*
who gradually recovered this region from the Célas by the end
of the twelfth century.
Several nagarams (Table IV, pp. 264-87) of this region are
known to have interacted with the itinerant guilds. They are
Vanavanmadévipuram (Sattur),'’? Kulasekharapuram (Dévada-
nam),''® Rajanarayanapuram (Pillaiyarpatti),""’7 and Vélangudi
(Vaniyanagaram).'* A late thirteenth-century inscription from
Tittandatanapuram (Tondi)' records an agreement made by
several merchant groups like the Afjuvannam, Manigramam
and the Samanta PandasSalis, on the levy of certain taxes on
commodities sold and purchased for the rebuilding expenses of
the local Siva temple (Table VI, pp. 291-303). An Envira-
ppattinam was located at Idaivali (Tirumalagandarkottai, Rama-
nathapuram district Table VI, pp. 291-303).'”°
The Salem-Coimbatore region (ancient Kongunadu) lay along
an ancient trade route linking Tamil Nadu with Kerala and
Karnataka. The route may be traced with the help of early Jain
centres,'*' as in the Pudukkottai region. This region also shows
a concentration of early Roman coin-finds and punch-marked
coins. Along the same route, once again, merchants of medieval
South India travelled constantly, bringing horses from the
western ports and perhaps taking textiles back. Seafaring mer-
chants, cloth merchants and merchant guilds frequently used
this route, leaving a trail of trading centres behind. Beérikai and
Kavanapalli in Hosur taluk of Dharmapuri district,'” were two
such horse-trading centres mentioned in twelfth-century inscrip-
tions (Table V, pp. 288-90).'”
The road to Puramale Nad bordering Mysore is referred to
in an early-tenth-century Nolamba inscription from Dharma-
puri.'4 The Atiyaman Peruvali (highway) passed through Pap1-
nayakanhalli near Dharmapuri or Tagadur, the capital of the
Atiyamans. Navartavalam, where trade fairs were held, was at a
distance of twenty-nine kadam from Papinayakanhalli.'”
Traders from Mayilarppil, Palaiyarai and other places in Tamil
Nadu constantly figure in the inscriptions of Salem, Erode, and
Coimbatore districts.’ Perhaps the most remarkable of the
trading centres of the Cola period was Mudikondan in Coim-
batore district (Table IV, pp. 264-87). Founded by Rajendra I
226 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
after the conquest of Gangavadi, it was known variously as
Mudikondac6lapuram, alias Desi Uyyakkondapattana. The mer-
chants of the eighteen towns north of the Kavéri, including
Talaikkadu (ancient Ganga capital), alias Rajarajapura, and those
of the eighteen towns south of the Kaveri, including Mud
kondacdlapuram, made several grants to the Visnu temple of
this place in the period of Hoysala Visnuvardhana.’” It was also
used as a military station by Ballala II after the withdrawal of
Cola power from this region.
Vikrama Pallavapuram (modern Véembatti) in Bhavani taluk,
Coimbatore district (Table VI, pp. 291-303) was made into an
Erivirappattana in the reign of Kulottunga I, and’a militant
group of Vira Valanjiyar is known to have resided at this
centre.'8
Among the many xagarams established in this region during
the Kongu-Cola period (twelfth-thirteenth centuries), mention
must be made of Perur in the Coimbatore district (Table IV,
pp. 264-87), where merchants who had the title “Cakravartin’
resided.”
The merchant corporations of Nanadesi Tisai Ayirattu Aii-
hurruvur and Manigramam of Kodumbalir were active in the
Kongu region from the tenth to the thirteenth centuries.'*°
Areas of economic importance in medieval Tamil Nadu have
not been clearly defined. Production and craft centres are equally
difficult to locate, as inscriptions present a great many problems
of interpretation. It has, however, been possible to identify
centres of textile production, the earliest known industry in
South India. Traditional weaving centres have more or less
continued down to the modern times, as shown by a com-
Parison, in a recent survey, of modern textile centres'*! with the
geographical distribution of weaving centres in medieval India.
The right type of soil for the cultivation of cotton, the avail-
ability of raw material, especially dyes, and the proximity of
ports seems to have been the major factors determining their
location.
Of the modern districts of Chingleput, Coimbatore, Madurai,
Salem, Tanjavur, Tiruchirapalli and Tirunelveli, with the excep-
tion of Coimbatore and Madurai, the other districts have fairly
numerous records relating to weaving centres of the Cola period.
5 Developments Within / 227
It is only after the migration of Dévanga weavers from Karnataka
and weavers from Saurastra in the Vijayanagar and post-Vijaya-
nagar periods, that Coimbatore and Madurai became major
textile producing regions.
Weaving as an industry was systematically promoted by the
rulers of South India from pre-Céla times. The Colas bestowed
special care on old centres of textile production and also
encouraged the settlement of weavers in new areas. Kafici was
the centre of one of the major cotton-producing regions of
Tamil Nadu, the other being Madurai. However, it is only for
Kancipuram that evidence of Cola patronage is clear, particular-
ly from the time of Uttama Cola. The demand, both internal
and foreign, for the cotton textiles of South India encouraged
production, and Kani developed into a premier weaving centre
even in pre-Cola times. Although Pallava inscriptions hardly
provide detailed evidence of this process of growth, the early
Cola records, particularly of Uttama Cola,'? make special pro-
visions for the weaver communities, indicating that by the tenth
century, this city had become the most prestigious textile produc-
tion centre, with its weavers specially chosen for producing royal
garments. By the end of the Cola period, several centres came
up around Kafcipuram, and eventually, the city came to repre-
sent the venue of the Mahanadu or corporate organization’?
of weavers, which controlled production and marketing of cloth
and its trade.
Regular settlements of weavers were encouraged in other
centres as well, in the Tirumadaivilagam of the temple, from
the late eleventh century, through special privileges or tax
concessions. Sirkali, Arantangi, Kumbhakonam and Nannilam
taluks in Tanjavur district and Chidambaram taluk in South
Arcot district had several weaving centres under the Colas from
the eleventh century,'** to which many more were added under
the Pandyas in the thirteenth to fourteenth centuries.
Under the Pandyas, weaver settlements appeared in Olaga-
puram, Srimusnam, Chidambaram and Nerkunram, all in South
Arcot district, Tillaiyadi in Tanjavur district, PaSankudi (Radha-
puram) and Sérmadeévi in Tirunelveli district, indicating the
growing importance of this industry.'”” Weavers-cum-traders
formed themselves into Saliya Nagarattar, as at Chidambaram
228 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
and Tirukkoyilur,!* and enjoyed the rights and privileges usually
extended to other magarams like the Sankarappadi and Vantya
Nagarattar.
In the Kongu region (i.e. Dharmapuri, Salem, Erode and
Coimbatore districts) several such weaver settlements were es-
tablished in the twelfth to fourteenth centuries under the Kongu-
Colas and Kongu-Pandyas. Some of them were Kadagattur
(Dharmapuri district), Vijayamangalam and Tirumurugan-
pundi (Coimbatore district) and Aragalir (Salem district).'’”
Through this region the rich trade in textiles passed into
Karnataka and Kerala, as Cilai Cettiyars and merchants from
Mayilappiur,'** an old weaving centre in Madras, are seen moving
across the area into Karnataka and other parts of South India.
Fairly detailed references to varieties of silk and cotton textiles,
techniques of weaving, printing and dyeing are found in literature
and occasionally in inscriptions, indicating the high degree of
specialization attained by this craft. Commercial taxes levied on
cotton, yarn and woven fabrics, as well as professional taxes on
weavers and dyers, progressively increased in the Cola period,
showing that the industry was developed to such a degree that
the revenue from these taxes was considerable.'*’ Not surprisingly,
the most frequently mentioned articles of merchandise in the
inscriptions of the merchant guilds are cotton and textiles.
Comments of foreign travellers like Abdul Feda and Chau-Ju-Kua
(thirteenth century) provide a very clear idea of the variety of
Coromandel textiles and their popularity abroad.’
The development of this highly productive craft led to the
enhancement of the economic and social status of the weavers,
some of whom rose to the rank of merchants and, perhaps, also
master weavers. This is also reflected in the increasing participa-
tion of weavers in gift-making, temple rituals and acquisition
of land control in the twelfth to thirteenth centuries.'*!
Craft production was perhaps more intensive in the Kongu
region, where twelfth to fourteenth century inscriptions indicate
large-scale artisan activity, and participation in important civic
duties, which conferred special privileges upon them. Privileges
were collectively granted to the Kanmalar (artisan) communities
in Kaficikkuvalnadu (Pariyur inscriptions of the thirteenth cen-
tury),'” of Véngala Nadu (Karuvir and Modakkir inscriptions
Developments Within / 229
of the thirteenth century),'® of Kangéya nadu and Pundurai
nadu (Vellodu inscription of the fourteenth century)'* under
the Kongu-Colas and Kongu-Pandyas. Agreements among ar-
tisan communities for various purposes also became common
during this period. Some kind of craft organization, at least
among the artisans of a specific region, was perhaps emerging
by the thirteenth century (Table VIII, pp. 309-10). However,
their dependence on the merchant organizations is underlined
in an inscription of the late eleventh century from Erode, where
the Nanadeési organization set up a ‘refugee’ centre for the
artisans (Table VI, pp. 291-303).'*° Erode and Mudikondan were
specially noted for merchant domination over local temples,
particularly in the latter.'**
It is also important to note that the Right and Left Hand
divisions are more prominently mentioned in the records from
areas in which the merchants assumed control and management
of temples and even acted as protectors of the craftsmen and
artisans, obviously due to the interdependence of these two
sections of the commercial world. Rules regarding the Valangai
and Idangai sects were sometimes framed by the Ayyavole guild
as seen in the thirteenth-century inscription of Tenkarai, Madurai
district (Table VI, pp. 291-303).'” The artisan community, as
participants in gift-making processes, is seen to be coming to
its own only after the twelfth century, 1.e. in the late Cola and
Pandya periods. In a predominantly agrarian set up, the artisans
were attached to the locality, i.e. to the temple and to landed
brahmanas and Vélalas through interdependent land tenures.
However, the demand for their services both by local landed
groups and itinerant merchant organizations, particularly in
temple-building and allied activities, resulted in their receiving
concessions and privileges, conferred sometimes by the temple
authorities and local chiefs, and sometimes by the merchant
organizations. Thus, in Pufjai (Kidarankondacolapuram, Tan-
javur district) the temple authorities granted privileges to certain
members of the anuloma Rathakara castes—blacksmiths, gold-
smiths, carpenters and stone masons—in the late Cola period
(late twelfth century).' Under the Pandyas, such instances were
more frequent, as seen in the thirteenth-century inscription of
Nodiyar (Tanjavur district) where the Kanmalas of several places
230 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
met and agreed to assign a tithe collected from among themselves
to the local temple, and to get differences settled conjointly with
the temple trustees and local chief.'” The Right and Left Hand
divisions are thus more visible in the thirteenth-fourteenth-cen-
tury inscriptions, claiming privileges which were directed towards
the improvement of their social position.
The revival of South India’s active participation in Asian
trade from the ninth century, once again saw the emergence of
coastal towns (Table VII, pp. 304-8), with a shift in the location
of major ports now oriented to serve new hinterlands, as, for
example, Nagappattinam at the mouth of the Kaveri serving the
core region of the Colas. Special importance was attached to
ports developed by ruling families, such as Mamallapuram under
the Pallavas and Nagappattinam under the Colas.
Nagappattinam superseded Mamallapuram, the latter still the
outlet for the Kaficipuram hinterland but subordinate to the
Cola port. Kaveripattinam continued to be used under the early
Colas, but it gave place to Nagappattinam in the eleventh
century. Of the Sangam (early historical) ports, Marakkanam
(Sopatma) north of Pondicherry, and Tondi and Korkai on the
Pandya coast were still in use. However, a series of secondary
towns once more dot the coast-line, starting from Tiruppalai-
vanam (Chingleput district), the northernmost on the Tamil
coast, down south to the coast of the Tirunelveii district where
Korkai and Kayal are located.
Tiruppalaivanam and Mayilarppil (mow a part of Madras)
served the region north of Kaficipuram between the eleventh
and thirteenth centuries.'° Kovalam (Viracolapattinam) in the
twelfth century,'*! Tiruvadandai (and Taiyir) in the thirteenth
century,'**—all located north of Mamallapuram—Sadras (Sadu-
rangapattinam)'* and Puduppattinam!'™ south of Mamallapu-
ram (both in the thirteenth-fourteenth centuries), Pallava
Pattinam (Kudalir),!* Cuddalore (Nissankamallan Pattinam)
and Tiruvéndipuram'® in the thirteenth century, show the
increase, towards the end of the thirteenth century, in coastal
towns where the constant presence of the merchant groups
suggests that most of them served as halting places for the
itinerant traders on a coastal road, or perhaps for coastal
shipping right through. It is also significant that the merchant
Developments Within / 251
bodies exercised the right of fixing tolls and duties on articles
of merchandise in their joint capacity in these towns,'’” apart
from some interior markets. Mannaikondac6lapattinam (Tiruk-
karugavur) and Sadanganpadi (Tranquebar) north of Nagappatti-
nam, were new towns added in the twelfth and thirteenth
centuries respectively.'* Several such towns came up also to the
south of Nagappattinam in the late Cola period.
The salt manufacturing centres (péralam) of the Cola period
are located near these coastal towns. From Marakkanam in South
Arcot district down south to Védaranyam near the salt swamps
of Umbala Nadu, were a series of salt manufacturing centres
established by the Colas from the eleventh century. Named after
their royal founders, these were invariably under the care of
royal officials who, on the basis of the income from salt,
organized the scale of expenses in the local temples.'*? Salt was
a major item of exchange in local and inter-regional trade, as
indicated by the reference to assignments of salt in Mahipala-
Kulakalapéralam (Achchapuram in Sirkali taluk) to the Siva
temple at Nallur Tirupperumanam for requirements of sandal
paste, incense etc.’ Salt was carefully excluded from the juris-
diction of the magaram, which had the right of fixing and
assigning taxes on all commodities except salt.’®
It would seem superfluous to speak of the religious factors
in the development and sustenance of urban centres, for most
certainly religion provides the most constant denominator of
all, i.e. the legitimization of all ventures, political, economic
and social. However, sacred associations have been the most
active determinant of the urban character and survival of centres
like Srirangam, Tirupati, Chidambaram, Tiruvannamalai and
many more such temple towns, whose umland extended not
merely to the immediate neighbourhood or cultural region, but
sometimes over long distances which pilgrims traversed at peri-
odic intervals.
Discussing the pattern of urbanization in South India,
particularly in relation to Kaficipuram, Hall and Spencer high-
light the contrasting urban experiences of medieval northern
Europe with those of South India.’” As against the conflicting
episcopal and burgher interests of medieval Europe, they em-
phasize the integrative aspects of Kaficipuram’s political,
232 A Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
religious and cultural institutions, which helped to preserve its
urban character and vitality, although primacy must be assigned
to economic factors. The latter, discussed by them at length,
stress the importance of Kaficipuram as a weaving and com-
mercial centre, a true mdnagaram whose economic outreach,
as indicated by Céla epigraphic evidence, conveys the impres-
sion that Kafcipuram was a logical meeting place for the
merchants of its hinterland.’®
Kaficipuram’s role of ‘superordinate’ integration among poli-
tical, religious and economic activities was not unique, for
similar roles may also be recognized in other multiple temple
centres like Kumbhakonam, single temple centres like Tanjavur,
Chidambaram and others. The difference, however, lay in the
accent on and ascendancy of either the political, commercial or
religious factor 1n its urbanization and survival.
Terminology, as seen in place names, is an indicator of the
prevalence of urban features, as, for example, when a puram,
nagaram or pattinam suffix, or a new name with such suffixes,
Is given to an expanding centre or to new quarters within an
expanding centre, as in Kudamukku-Palaiyarai. Palaiyarai was
also known by names ending with the puram suffix, such as
Nandipuram and Mudikondac6lapuram. Pattinam usually refers
to a coastal town or port, but interior towns with names ending
in pattinam are also known.’
It would perhaps be more useful to look for a hierarchy
among urban centres and the nature of inter-relationships, for
urban activity invariably tended to move towards core regions
where capitals and administrative centres (Table I, pp. 256-7)
were located, and all important traffic converged on them, as
indicated by medieval highways.!®
References
1. A. Appadorai, Economic Conditions in Southern India, Madras, 1936,
vols 1 and 1; T.V. Mahalingam, South Indian Polity, Madras, 1955;
S. Gururajachar, Some Aspects of Economic and Social Life in Kar-
nataka (AD 1000-1300), Mysore, 1974; K. Sundaram, Studies in
Economic and Social Conditions in Medieval Andhra, Machilipatnam,
Developments Within of 2335
1968; G.R. Kuppuswamy, Economic Conditions in Karnataka
(aD 973-ap 1336), Dharwar, 1975.
B. Stein, Peasant State and Society in Medieval South India, Delhi,
1980.
Trade and Statecraft in the Age of the Colas, New Delhi, 1980.
Kenneth R. Hall, ‘Peasant State and Society in Chola Times: A
View from the Tiruvidaimarudur Urban Complex’, /ndian Eco-
nomic and Social History Review, July-Dec. 1981, vol. xv, nos 3
and 4; Kenneth R. Hall and G.W. Spencer, ‘The Economy of
Kancipuram: A Sacred Centre in Early South India’, Journal of
Urban History, Feb. 1980, vol. 6, no. 2.
Political Geography of the Chola Country, Madras, 1973.
Clarence Maloney has investigated the impact of maritime trade
and coastal traffic on the development of civilization in early
Tamil Nadu. See his ‘The Effect of the Early Coastal Sea Traffic
on the Development of Civilization in South India’, Ph.D. Thesis
(unpublished), University of Pennsylvania, 1968; ‘The Beginnings
of Civilization in South India’, Journal ofA sian Studies, 1970, xxix,
no. 3; ‘Archaeology in South India: Accomplishments and Pros-
pects’, in B. Stein (ed.), Essays on South India, New Delhi, 1976.
The exponents of the bhakti ideology, namely the Vaisnava
alvars and Saiva nayanars, are dated in this period, although
evidence of the systematic choice of bhakti centres for temple-
building is available only from the ninth century ap.
See Chapter 6 in this volume.
R. Tirumalai, Rajendra Vinnagar, Madras, 1980, 3.
116 and 119 of 1905. The number refers to the inscription and
the year of the Annual Report on (South) Indian Epigraphy.
South Indian Inscriptions (hereafter S//), xiv, Inscriptions nos 36
and 155.
. _S ly. Magee
. Ibid.
106 of 1905; 402 of 1916; S//, xrv, 145.
SII, xm, 241.
. SII, xiv, 36.
120 of 1905.
335 and 348 of 1916.
359 and 361 of 1916.
See Chapter 6 in this volume; M. Rajamanikkanar, Sarva Samaya
Valarcci (in Tamil), Madras, 1972, 2nd edn, 206-34.
234 / Trade, Tdeology and Urbanization
109 of 1901; Epigraphia Indica, x\, 292¢ff.
Tirumalai, Rajendra Vinnagar, Introduction, 1.
571 of 1916.
. 534 of 1916.
. 614 and 619 of 1916.
ew STL Dav SS.
. 544, 633, 635, 653 and 676 of 1916.
. 544 of 1911; 658 of 1916.
. 695 of 1916.
_ See K.A. Nilakanta Sastri, The Colas, reprint of second edition,
Madras, 1975, 172-3, 199-200.
. SIT, m, 84; v. 991.
. SII, vu, 449, 452, 454, 460, 462, 465, 466, 467, 471 and 472.
395: of 1922,
. See. Subbarayalu, 45-6. Tantyzr means independent settlement.
SIT, m, 158.
Subbarayalu, index to maps, 193; 10, 10a and 213; 5.
343 of 1917.
SIT, v. 465.
. Subbarayalu, index to maps, 211-16, 38; 1 and 209; 1.
Hall, Trade and Statecraft, 95-7.
Ibid., 188.
. Ibid., 87ff.
. 54 of 1888; SI, v. 54; 206 of 1939-40.
. 360 of 1921; SI, xu, 71.
. SII, vu, 926..
. 222 of 1911; S//, xm, 13.
Mahalingam, Kavicipuram in Early South Indian History, Madras,
1969, 3.
. C. Minakshi, Administration and Social Life Under the Pallavas, rev.
ed., Madras, 1977, 29, 187.
K.R. Venkatarama Ayyar, ‘Medieval Trade, Craft and Merchant
Guilds in South India’, Journal of Indian History, 1947 (1948),
vol. xxv, parts 1-3, 272.
49. Hall, 130.
50. Tiraimur Nadu had two nagarams, namely, Tiraimir nagaram
and Kumaramarttandapuram; Umbala Nadu had two nagarams—
Irumudicolapuram and Rajéndrasingapuram (26A of 1961-2);
T.N. Subramaniam, ‘Pallankovil Fragmentary Copper Plate Grant
of Early Chola Period’, Transactions of the Archaeological Society
of South India, 1958-9, 84ff, Subbarayalu, map 12. 119; 3. See
Table IV for nagaram location.
Developments Within / 255
51. Hall, chapter 5. ;
52. Tanjavur was a royal creation, particularly the Rajarajesvara temple
around which the merchant quarters were located. It had two
nagarams which organized the trade of the city and administered
the markets. The personal involvement of the king and members
of the royal family in Tanjavar’s commerce was also a major factor
in the city’s special status. x
53. Terms like kalanju, madat, tulaippon and Ilakkasu mentioned in
inscriptions suggest the use of coins. Regular gold currency seems
to have emerged by the middle of the tenth century. This is
attributed to contact with Ceylon. A large number of coins known
as the Ceylon (man) coins has survived. See B.D. Chattopadhyaya,
Coins and Currency Systems in South India, New Delhi, 1977, 52ff,
122ff, 136ff.
54. 52 of 1928-9; SII, v, 147; 288 of 1964-5; 304 of 1964-5; 439 of
1917.
55. Parantaka’s alliance with the Irukkuvéls of Kodumbalir, his
conquest of the Pandya country and the not very successful
Ceylon war, may indicate an attempt in this direction, but the
Céla hold over regions beyond Pudukkottai was quite clearly
tenuous.
56. Mudikondacolapuram (Mudikondan in the Coimbatore district)
and Talaikkadu (Talakkad), south and north of the Kavéri respec-
tively, were located in the Kongu country and Gangavadi. Talai-
kkadu came to be called Rajarajapura, evidently after Rajaraja I’s
conquest of this region. The Kongu country gave access both to
the Kanara districts and Mysore area. See Nilakanta Sastri, The
Colas, 174ff. The appointment of Viceroys with Cola-Ganga and
Cola-Pandya titles in these regions is additional evidence of direct
control.
57. Maldrpatna in Mysore—508 and 509 of 1911. See also K.G. Krish-
nan, ‘Tamil Inscriptions in Karnataka’, in A.V. Narasimhamurty
(ed.), Archaeology of Karnataka, University of Mysore, 1978, 175-6.
SII, xv, 145. .
58.
59. The earliest attested mercantile towns are those of Siravalli (Basini-
konda in the Chittoor district) and Kattur (in the Chingleput
district), both dated to the eleventh century, 256 and 342 of 1912.
60. SIT, vu, 901.
61. The Sankarappadi nagarattar were not merely suppliers of oil and
ghee, but were also administrators of endowments of lamps in
several temples, e.g. Valikandapuram (Tiruchirapalli district), 299,
300 and 310 of 1964-5; 241, 247, 251, 252 and 288 of 1943-4.
236 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
300 and 310 of 1964-5; 241, 247, 251, 252 and 288 of 1943-4.
Most donations to the temple at Valikandapuram were managed
by the Sankarappadi nagarattar. They seem to have enjoyed a
fairly high status as merchants. See Hall, 54-5. |
Séngalipuram (Jayasimhakulakalapuram), Nannilam taluk,
Tanjavur district 23 and 30 of 1917 of the reign of Rajéndra I
(1018-44).
. Pulldr (Namakkal taluk, Salem district), tenth century inscription,
325 and 372 of 1939-40.
432 of 1913; 141 of 1974-5; 507 of 1958-9.
. 263 of 1943-4 and 227 of 1916.
507 of 1958-9.
. K. Sundaram, 37ff.
161 of 1907; 182 of 1926; 322 of 1958-9.
Champakalakshmi, See Chapter 6 in this volume.
163 of 1907; JPS, no. 218. (JPS = Inscriptions of the Pudukkottai
State).
. 709 of 1962-3.
Tirumadaivilagam—a temple square, ARE, 1921-2, part u. It is
also defined as quarters around the temple. T.N. Subramaniam,
South Indian Temple Inscriptions, glossary.
. Several variants of the name occur in Tamil inscriptions. See K.
Indrapala, ‘Some Medieval Mercantile Communities of South
India and Ceylon’, Journal of Tamil Studies, Oct. 1970, vol. 1,
NnOezy 27.
288 of 1964-5; 519 of 1905; SII, xin, 28; 305 of 1964-5.
. The Valafijiyar are often mentioned just as Valafjiyar, but some-
times as Valanijiyar of Tennilangai (Sri Lanka), indicating that
such bodies existed both in South India and Sri Lanka. See
Indrapala.
Hall, Trade and Statecraft, 151.
. Erivira and Munaivira—armed heroes. See K.R. Venkatarama
Ayyar, 277.
. 213 of 1976-7.
. 342 of 1912.
. 256 of 1912. ‘
38 of 1931-2.
213 of 1976-7.
. 358 of 1916.
129 of 1905.
. See Sundaram, 92-6.
. See K.G. Krishnan, ‘Chittiraméli-p-periyanadu—An Agricultural
Developments Within / 237
Guild of Medieval Tamil Nadu’, Journal of the Madras University,
Jan. 1982, vol. tv, no. 1.
. 286 of 1964-5; 10 of 1924; 193 of 1939-40.
. 96 of 1974-5; SII, vin, 442.
. 179, 183 and 188 of 1973-4.
. 598 of 1926.
. M.M. Abraham, ‘The Ayyavole Guild of Early Medieval South
India’, M.Phil Dissertation (unpublished), Jawaharlal Nehru
University, New Delhi, 1978, chapter v; idem Two Medieval
Merchants Guilds of South India, Delhi, 1988.
. Abraham, ‘The Ayyavole Guild’, 78ff, S//, vim, 442.
. G.W. Spencer, ‘The Politics of Plunder: The Cholas in Eleventh
Century Ceylon’, Journal of Asian Studies, May 1976, vol. 35,
403-19.
For a detailed account of these expeditions see Nilakanta Sastri,
211-20, 271, 316-18.
. T. Balakrishnan Nayar, The Dowlaishwaram Hoard of Eastern
Chalukyan and Chola Coins, Bulletin of the Madras Government
Museum, 1966, vol. 9, no. 2. See also Chattopadhyaya, 58-61.
Smaller Leiden Grant, Epigraphia Indica, vol. xa.
. Kuldttunga I acquired the epithet of ‘Sungam tavirtta Cola’ (The
Cola Who Abolished Tolls), repeatedly mentioned in his inscrip-
tions: e.g. 124 of 1927. This epithet is also recognized in the
legend ‘Sung’ on some of his coins issued from Nellir and
Kancipuram which were mint towns in his period. See Chat-
topadhyaya, 60.
Larger Leiden Grant of Rajaraja I, Epigraphia India, vol. xxi.
161 and 166 of 1956-7.
Chattopadhyaya, 145.
. Nilakanta Sastri, 316-18.
. SII, x, 651.
. M.G.S. Narayanan, Cultural Symbiosis in Kerala, Trivandrum,
1972, chapter tv, 35-6.
Sundaram, 92-6.
. Abraham, 103.
. MS. Govindswamy, The Role of Feudatories in Later Chola History,
Annamalai University, 1979, 19-22.
. R.E.M. Wheeler, ‘Arikamedu: An Indo-Roman Trading Station
on the East Coast of India’, Ancient India, July 1946, no. 2,
116-18.
_ See 1. Mahadevan, ‘Corpus of Tamil Brahmi Inscriptions’, in
238 J Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Nagaswamy (ed.), Seminar on Inscriptions, Madras, 1968; also SI/,
xiv, no. 45.
109. Champakalakshmi, ‘South India’, chapter 9 in A. Ghosh (ed.),
Jain Art and Architecture, Bharatiya Jnanpith, New Delhi, 1974.
110. Abraham, 82-3.
111. 52 of 1928-9.
112. 359 of 1904; SII, xvi, 389.
BA3. 96 of 1974-5; 154 of 1903; SI, vin, 442.
114. 31 of 1928-9; 10 of 1924; 406 of 1914.
115. 332 of 1929-30.
116. 248 of 1940-1.
Ei, 147 of 1935-6.
118. 507 of 1958-9.
119. 598 of 1926-7.
120. 38 of 1931-2.
121. See Mahadevan.
ZZ: Annur, Coimbatore district, 581 to 636 of 1922; Hosur, Dharma-
puri district, 307 of 1969-70; 296 of 1969-70; 259, 272 and 279
of 1969-70.
123. 296 of 1969-70; 477 of 1970-1.
124. 199 of 1910.
125. 169 of 1968-9.
126. 581-636 of 1922; 259, 272 and 279 of 1969-70; SII, rv, 147.
ey, 2 of 1910.
128. 213 of 1976-7.
129. Ikkarai Boluvampatti, Coimbatore district, 415 and 418 of
1958-9. Merchants with the title Cakravarti of a place Called
Muttam or Amarabhujanaganallir in Pérur Nadu identified as
a part of Pérur. See S//, v, 228 and 233.
130. SIT, tv, 147; 97 of 1915; 215 of 1976-7; 17 of 1910.
131. Economic Atlas of the Madras State, National Council of Applied
Economic Research, New Delhi, 1962, 103.
Be. The Madras Museum Plates, S//, m, part 4. Also Hall and G.W.
Spencer, ‘The Economy of Kancipuram—A Sacred Centre in
Early South India’, Journal of Urban History, Feb. 1980, vol. 6,
no. 2, 141-3.
133. Vijaya Ramaswamy, ‘The Weaver Communities of the Kancipu-
ram Region, ¢ ap 700-1700’, M.Phil Dissertation (unpublished),
Jawaharlal Nehru University, 48ff.
134, SIT, xin, 16; SII, vit, 21 and 22; 508 of 1922; 308 of 1913; SII,
xl, 154,
Developments Within / 239
. 132 of 1919; 248 of 1916; 269 of 1913; S//, xu, 163; vu, 859; 217
of 1934-5; 238 of 1925; 544 of 1916; 633, 635 and 653 of 1916.
. 308 of 1913; SI/, xu, 154; SI/, vu, 901.
. 194 of 1910; 204 of 1967-8; 98 of 1915; 438 of 1913.
. 165 of 1968-9; 259, 272 and 279 of 1969-70.
. Vijaya Ramaswamy, Textiles and Weavers in Medieval South India,
Delhi, 1985, chapter u.
. Nilakanta Sastri, Foreign Notices of South India, Madras, 1972,
reprint, 148 and 214.
. 613 of 1920; 248 of 1916; 117, 223-5 of 1973-4.
. 186 of 1910.
. SII, m, 25.
. 227 of 1967-8.
. 215 of 1976-7.
. 2 of 1910.
. 138 of 1910; SII, xt, 251.
. 198 of 1925.
. 201 of 1932-3.
. 325 of 1928-9; 372 of 1928-9; 256 of 1912; 261 of 1910.
. 259 of 1910; 10 and 11 of 1934-5.
. 261 of 1910.
. 102 of 1932-3.
. Ibid.
. 274 of 1915.
. 93 of 1943-4.
. 119 of 1943-4 (Rishivandyam, South Arcot district); 103 of
1932-3 (Sadras); 227 of 1916 (Taiyir-Sengamal); 372 of 1928-9
(Tiruppalaivanam); 296 of 1964-5 (Tuvarankurichchi-Trichy dis-
trict); S/J, vin, 442 (Piranmali-Ramnad district); S//, xvu, 142
(Tirthanagari, South Arcot district).
. 424 of 1918; 75 of 1890; SII, 1, 399; 262 of 1925.
. 23,24 and 28 of 1919 (Rajarajappéralam—modern Marakkanam).
. 522 of 1918.
. 309 of 1968-9. (Vellur, Musiri taluk, Tiruchirappalli district).
. Hall and Spencer, 145ff.
. Ibid., 137.
. Eg. Dési Uyyakkonda Pattinam or Mudikondacdlapuram (Mudi-
kondan, Coimbatore district)—2 of 1910; Aruviyur or Desi Uyya-
vanda pattinam (Tirupputir, Madurai district)—97 of 1908.
. SII, xm, 16; See also Chapter 6 in this volume.
240 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
TAMIL NADU
The Urban Process
Period | (600-850 A.D.)
40 ‘0 40 f wy. -
Kilometres
77
Map 2: Tamil Nadu - The Urban Process: Period I (AD 600 - 850)
Developments Within / 241
TAMIL NADU
The Urban Process
Period II (850-985 A.D.)
BAY
OF
BENGAL
ATHAPURAM
Rear L
IRUNELVELI &
Map 3: Tamil Nadu - The Urban Process: Period II (Ap 850 - 985)
242 f Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
TAMIL NADU
The Urban Process
Period Ill (985-1150 A.D.)
« ~\ BAY
ia; soutH.arcor “© oF
BENGAL
“w=... NILGIRI j,
= ard
A~t
COIMBATORE
é: .
c
\
Legend /
}
ROYAL CENTRE:
BRAHMADEYA.
TAN- KURU:
NAGARAM ..
CRAFT CENTRE
MERCHANT BODIES.
PORT
COASTAL TOWN D@r>aseop
INDIAN OCEAN
Map 4: Tamil Nadu - The Urban Process: Period III
(AD 985 - 1150)
Developments Within J 243
TAMIL NADU
The Urban Process
Period IV (1150-1250 A.D.)
—S
Kilometres
ro4
wo
2
“ eT ee *
~ i BAY
r ~ . OF
lil 725 XG BENGAL
P . : a2 _ “
aA~2 ®3 ™ ; * Vas
->& —-ComBaTORE Bey TRUCHCHIRAPALLE JA
~7 ~ B85, | Ls) ) = nn F ZF - — "
3 i wf Sd , Bs, a>
- ¢ Falah THANJAVUR @
s / 7
(
4 ( a™ "
QG or” MADURAI MS s Se.
oF ee : x
Legend 0
TAN KURU a
NAGARAM
‘ & ,
CRAFT CENTRE © 49 SN Ne
COASTAL TOWN: © %
; i E
?
INDIAN OCEAN
i
7° 73° n* <
Map 5: Tamil Nadu - The Urban Process: Period IV
(ap 1150 - 1250)
244 ff Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
TAMIL NADU
The Urban Process
Period V (1250-1350 A.D.)
40 20 0 40
Kilometres
BAY
~ 5 A OF
TING, BENGAL
:
Ban eee
ahem E™
“S THANJAVUR
\ go ‘t e
NAGARAM
MERCHANT BODIES & oR
PORT ws? RA gh ae ~al
COASTAL TOWN z 58 Ye,
b 39
ia
INDIAN
Map 6: Tamil Nadu - The Urban Process: Period V
(aD 1250 - 1350)
Developments Within J 245
TAMIL NADU
Urban Configurations
1300 A.D.
ROYAL CENTRE:
BRAHMADEYA. ;
a
TAN-KURU é Ry eyAT HAPURAM i
NAGARAM e a D
CRAFT CENTRE . a
MERCHANT BODIES
a Ne
COASTAL TOWN
=
4 nASCAnMAR
INDIAN OCEAN
Map 7: Tamil Nadu - Urban Configurations AD 1300
246 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
TAMRAPARNI VALLEY
Urban Core
ta]
;
.
VINDANUR
‘ Pay) “—@ Ns
~ ye ¢ \4nxurtacam
‘
‘Gj
: \Y 4 TIRUVALISVARAM as y
, MANNARKOIL@® OBRAHMADESAM ®
; r x... TIRUNELVELI
AMBASAMUDRAM %
Ss KALLIDAIKURCHI @ Or cq@ KARISULNDAMANGALAM
. PATTAMADAI @ CERANMADEV! e =
(@)R AJENORA COLA PURAM
Legend
ROYAL CENTRE
BRAHMADEYA
NAGARAM
MERCHANT BODIES
TEMPLE CENTRE
Map 8: The Tamraparni Valley: Urban Core
Developments Within ,, 247
Index to Maps 2-6 (The Urban P rocess)
Category Place Name District Location
Code No.
Map 2, Period I (600-850)
Royal Centres Kaficipuram Chingleput
Madurai Madurai
Nagaram Tirukkalukkunram Chingleput
Virificipuram North Arcot
Tirukkoyilur South Arcot
Tiruvadi South Arcot
Tirunagesvaram Tanjavur
Mamallapuram Chingleput
Ports
Korkai Tirunelveli
N—HAW—WW&=HNH&&YB
Map 3, Period II (850-985)
Royal Centres Uratyur Tiruchirapalli
Palaiyarai Tanjavur
W>w W
Brahmadeyas as
Taniyurs Uttirameérur Chingleput
Kaveérippakkam North Arcot
Brahmadeyas as
Urban Centres Kudamukku Tanjavur
Nagaram Tondamanad Chittoor
Colapuram North Arcot
Takkolam North Arcot
Pi(u)llar Salem
Jambai South Arcot
Tirunamanallur South Arcot
Kottur Tanjavur
Tillaisthanam Tanjavur
248 Pe Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Category Place Name District Location
Code No.
Tiruppalanam Tanjavur 14
Tiruvaiyaru Tanjavur 15
Tiruvédikudi Tanjavur 16
Tiruvidaimarudur Tanjavur 17
Meélappaluvur Tiruchirapalli 18
Valikandapuram — Tiruchirapalli 19
Ukkirankottai Tirunelveli 20
Centres of Pudukkottai
Merchant Bodies Kodumbalir (Tiruchirapalli) 1
Munisandai Pudukkottai 2
Kamudi Ramanathapuram 3
Salem Salem 4
Konerirajapuram Tanjavur 5
Koyil Tanjavur 6
Tévarayanpeéttai
Tiruchchatturat Tanjavur 7
Tiruvilakkudi Tanjavur 8
Tiruvellarai Tiruchirapalli 9
Kuttalam Tirunelveli 10
Trade Centres Hosur Dharmapuri l
Ports Kaveérippum- Tanjavur 2
pattinam
Map 4, Period III (985-1150)
Brahmadeyas as
Taniyurs Madurantakam — Chingleput 3
Manamadi Chingleput 4
Brahmadesam North Arcot 5
Sakkaramallir North Arcot 6
Takkolam North Arcot 7
Developments Within / 249
Category Place Name District Location
Code No.
Tiruvallam North Arcot 8
Ukkal North Arcot 9
Brahmadesam/ South Arcot 10
Ennayiram
Valatyamadévi/ South Arcot 11
Erumbuar
Viranarayana/ South Arcot 12
Caturvedimanga-
lam
Tiruvellarai Tiruchirapalli
Brahmadeyas as
Urban Centres Mannarkoyi1 Tirunelveli
Nagaram Phase | Kalahasti Chittoor
Mudikondan Coimbatore
Karandai North Arcot
Meélpadi North Arcot
Sundaram Ramanathapuram
Sattur Ramanathapuram 26
Tirucchengodu Salem
Olagapuram South Arcot
Panayavaram South Arcot
Vayirapuram South Arcot
Koyil Tirumalam Tanjavur
(Ambar)
Pallankoyil Tanjavur
Kuhuar Tanjavur
Manambadi Tanjavur
Séngalipuram Tanjavur
Tiruppurambiyam Tanjavur
Tiruvarur Tanjavur
250 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Category Place Name District Location
Cade No.
Tiruchirapalli 38
Chinna
Darapuram
Singalantakapuram Tiruchirapalli 39
Kalladaikkuricchi Tirunelveli
Nagaram Phase 2 Palir Chingleput
Tirumalisai Chingleput
Tiruppalaivanam Chingleput
Vembatti Coimbatore
Narttamalai Pudukkottai
(Tiruchirapalli)
Tirumanikuli Tanjavur
Nalladai Tanjavur
Tirunaraiyur Tanjavur
Sivayam (Rat- Tiruchirapalli
nagiri)
Uyyakkondan Tiruchirapalli
Tirumalai
Centres of
Merchant Bodies
Phase 1 Kattur Chingleput
Mayilappur Chingleput
Basinikonda Chittoor
Erode Coimbatore
(Periyar)
Kalasapakkam North Arcot
Tamaraippakkam North Arcot
Viralur North Arcot
Tirukkolambiyir Tanjavur
Kumiaravayalur Tiruchirapalli
Developments Within J 251
Distr
Category Place Name Location
Code No.
Vikravandi South Arcot 57
Ambasamudram Tirunelveli 20
Tiruvalisvaram Tirunelveli 21
Vijayanarayanam Tirunelveli 22
Centres of
Merchant Bodies
Phase 2 Sivapuri Ramanathapuram
Tiruchirapalli
Srirangam
Trade Centres Talaichchangadu Tanjavur
Ports Nagappattinam Tanjavur
Coastal Towns Tiruvadandai Chingleput
Marakkanam South Arcot
Achchapuram Tanjavur
Tillatyadi Tanjavur
Tirukkarugavur Tanjavur
Map 5, Period IV (1150-1250)
Brahmadeyas as
Tantyurs Tiruvannamalai North Arcot
Bahur Pondicherry
Tribhuvane Pondicherry
Villupuram South Arcot
Mannagudi Tanjavur
Nagaram Pundamalli Chingleput
Perur Coimbatore
Kadagattur Salem
Tiruvarangulam Salem
Chidambaram South Arcot
Vanvanrnahadeévi- South Arcot
puram
(Manjakuppam)
252 J Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Category Place Name District Location
Code No.
Vikravandi South Arcot 57
Kovil Venni Tanjavur 58
Pallavarayan Pettai Tanjavur 59
Tiruttengur Tanjavur 60
Tiruvidaikkali Tanjavur 61
Tribhuvanam Tanjavur 62
Karur Tiruchirapalli 63
Tirumukktdal Tiruchirapalli 64
Sattantr Tiruchirapalli 65
Tirumanamédu Tiruchirapalli 66
Tiruppangili Tiruchirapalli 67
Vellur Tiruchirapalli 68
Centres of
Merchant Bodies Kavéripuram Coimbatore 25
Kollégal (Karnataka) 26
Sakkramallur North Arcot 27
Tirukkannapuram Tanjavur 28
Tiruvidaivayil Tanjavur 29
Anbil Tiruchirapalli 30
Uttattir Tiruchirapalli 31
Vengalam Tiruchirapalli 32
Trade Centres Annur (Manniyir) Coimbatore
Avinasi Coimbatore
Adiyamankottai Dharmapuri
Dharmapuri Dharmapuri
Papinayakanahalli Dharmapuri
Berikai Dharmapuri
Péraiyur Tiruchirapalli
wmSWDwSoWO W N
(Pudukkottai)
Developments Within J 253
Category Place Name District Location
Code No.
Tirupputur Ramanathapuram 10
Coastal Towns Kovalam Chingleput 6
Pasi Pattinam Ramanathapuram i
Cuddalore South Arcot
Tiruvéndipuram South Arcot
Vedaranya Tanjavur
Adirampattinam Tanjavur
Nagaram Period V
(1250-1350)
Kolumam Coimbatore
Kunnattur Coimbatore
(Talunri)
Céranarayana- Madurai
puram
Vikkiramangalam Madurai
Alakapuri Ramanathapuram
Dévadanam Ramanathapuram
Pillaiyarpatti Ramanathapuram
Velangudi Ramanathapuram
Aragalar Salem
Kiramangalam Tanjavur
Angamangalam Tirunelveli
Marandai Tirunelveli
Radhapuram Tirunelveli
Singikulam Tirunelveli
Tirunelveli Tirunelveli
Vélur Kasba Tirunelveli
Vindanur Tirunelveli
Centres of
Merchant Bodies Sadras Chingleput
254 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Category Place Name District Location
Code No.
Sengamal Chingleput 34
Dalavay Pattinam Coimbatore 35
Vijayamangalam Coimbatore 36
(Periyar)
Tenkarai Madurai 37
Aruppukkottai Ramanathapuram 38
Idaivali (Tiru- Ramanathapuram 39
malagandarkotta1)
40
Piranmalai Ramanathapuram
41
Tirumalai Ramanathapuram
Tondi Ramanathapuram 42
43
Rishivandyam South Arcot
44
Tirthanagari South Arcot
45
Kamarasavalli Tiruchirapalli
46
Kovilpatti Tiruchirapalli
47
Tuvarankurichchi Tiruchirapalli
48
Manur Tirunelveli
49
Munanjupatti Tirunelveli
Coastal Towns Puduppattinam Chingleput 12
13
Tranquebar Tanjavur
J
9 p O U l
o
u i n s s e
O
I I E I L Y
D
e
a n p e W
U 1
0 j 2 q
U U p J r PZ a
N S
U d
G o
d s a u e
U p u k e
F I G
P O
a i dp o t i
aI dn q
O D U l L J IS
IH I
s e A
pJ uO e g
O L O I
- S 8 6 P U P
s o l e w
‘ J a m
J u a s a i
U
O
UU PL U P A s n o r a p a N U O F N U
du
ie
u r a y y )
A
V
ss
se
u t & d - a 1
y 2 i
np
d ) = p
a
d
I m 4 O I N Y N I S O I g
P
a
y
sIeYa DJsO I U T a d u au yt s& t
x
J e y )I T w
e
s e y d a s e
y
| A p u r g
s OI a e
‘
O J O
U
T r sI tO y jo e g
s s
I I I
F
O V
U
“ p
a
a r
yj
a
A 8 i , v c b a l u o a . b e a t t o t e
U L [ e o
I
Y d e I 8 0U 2O 3N E Jd oO ] | a y
) s a z sytu a d w a a r ’ A j u uo t s a| q e y p u e ‘ T
a y y s a s y u a a s i e
p a y s t ]
A y j e o n a q e J y a d p y U e N s a y ) j U a s a i d s a u e U p u e
3 d 1 y s 1 p s a u r e u
8 u uu el a d d e
‘ s y a y o e i q
a U ] s 2 z W Ua 2x >e
p a y s i ] J a p u N
j U a r a y J I P s p o t0 }i a d M O Y sa Y y i [ P
I Y ] Y I, e W
S I J L I I P UJ II Y I 2 E Y )
a y ) p r u s 2 9 U2 01 93 U I p2 e Y A p e a r y e a W O D
Y ) J U P A1 D0 I I I
d y I 9 a d s 1 2 )
3 e 7 eA Y Dj uu t a y ) p o u a d J a p u n Y o r y m s t a t
a y ) y u
a
n b a s q n ‘s s p o u a d
p o r‘ i| a g ‘ a I a v
‘ Q ¢ g - 9 0 9
s y u a sU zy i) d a s e j o r - s 1 d p o u a d U s y m a y a s e
2 1 2 M 2 4 } Z u r j n
i
‘ s r a m o d
p o r Je ]g ‘ a t a v
‘ o g g - 9 ¢ g
s y u a saaysad a s A j u e q e j o d ‘ p o t s a d
p o t a g ‘ [ ] ] ‘ a T a v
[ - S g 6 ‘ Q C
s i u a s a i d a s a y a a [ p p r y y e j o d p o r a d y i m o m
a v ( Q
Ss
Te I - O Z 0 IU m o UYl s
S 2 } G Ae I] P u r T A
p o l ‘ yA y “ a t a v
‘ Q S Z { -
O S T ] s j u a saoyi}d a s a i e ] e j o y ‘ p o u d
p o r s 2‘ yA g “ a I A Y
‘ Q ¢ ¢ ] - Q
S z Z I s y u a s ey s d i a s e j O D - 3 s o d ‘ p o r a d U d S Y m a y )
I e Z e U R A R
Ia
IW AI E Ia Ay q}
B U I R U T1 W0 j O} uPD et } Y I N O S ‘ R I P U ]
I l
U
=
2
j u p a g 4 a 1 r y 0 u o n v u d o f u l j e a d e e s a r y y e g “ A N ( I p o v l a d ) x 2 ] d w r o 2 d ] d u r a y J a p u n N O s ] e 3 9 S ) — u v i v s v u ( T ‘ o u ‘ A T 2 1 9 2 1 p a E a d y - 2 1 d w o e 4 1 2 U R T I S I I Y 1 } u 2 9 J e A o s e j O D - 2 1 d w o e i d U e T S I I Y D I Q R ] O s e 2 2 5 ) W O l j O Q ] ‘ O U ‘ T A ( u v v i s i U d p y
=
“ O
P O S
o S I E I 5 : jy! ‘
a
=
A
P
l
e l e
e
“
O S T I
o
s z I x 0
.
a O
S
T
( P I
s p o e e - S 8 ‘ P a
n d 6
d
o
-
y
N )
i
i s a 1 5 8
g q j u s e 6 - 0 P " is
a c 5
7 a 8
y ) « |
p
e j
s
o y y 1 r s § g e 0 5 8 - 0 0 9 w e i n d i s ( w e s n d i o u r e ( 1 e i n p
o
w e d ) m A r e ( y j e d e s y o n
u
r y
r
y y )
n
e
e
y y )
i
c q ,
a
t y
. =
j v r u 0 i P s I i Q t ] y u / )
(
u s s i u q s ] a p o y y ) w e i j o y i 4 q ( a n d a j z u r y > )
§
— P A I M P E P E W ( t e r n p e y ) n p e u
w
e l i n y s n d i e s y ( y p e d e s r y r u t y )
=
j u n g d
v s s 0 a
w e t
t | e d ,
= A a y e
a z e y e g
A A I T E A
1 B I E A I m M O J T
A a q j e A
Y e a e y
“
O N | 7 ‘ €
S
S
B J O , [ e p u a p
i s a
s
j e i I d e s W r o r y Y I 6 A i n j u aa ss ) a y q* e] y ‘ o u ( I e j o y j e d e 2s9 s ) o s y e J 2 p u n - v 3 p u ‘ m m s 2 [ 9 2 “] A l
g ¢ o u
e j o s [ e X o r A i t p e p Au qn o y a p| u a l e y 1 0 1 ) ( b b - P e A p u e g - e j o
7 > )
[ e 3 I 1 9 9 2 1 4 A ] U 9 9 2 2 s ) 2 1 q e ] ‘ ] ‘ o u
Z
p u r P 1 9 2 ‘L A I ‘ o u ( p p
(‘
r P
y
, n a c u e L . i n a e ( u e - e p u o y t e : s u e s w r e i n d e j o s “ e p u o y i e s u e d
)
( u r e s n d e j o D w e i n d e s p u a l
e
( t a g p e u s a s )
m (
m
,
) y z
)
y
n
i
u
q
y‘ y
e
y
n o
p u
e e
r
u w
n g (
p j e
M e
‘ d r
e
i
e )
l y
y a
t
g p n
e e o
M p e = u i n
q u i
- e i =e u n
s t y
e u c ( u e y i n y a n a e ( u e y ) e p u o y i
e u u
n p e u r
j e a
( 1 ] e d
e s r y
n p e u ( 1 y 2 a j 2 u T
u r y )
p a i (
n m e ,
w s ny
e j
o
i
j
w
e
r A e s
q p u m [ e A e a s e d e
y a A d y A r t u y y y
a e y
e
a e y a r y
-
e u r j
e
T e A ,
u e W a u 2 A d ]
> * ¢ 9 +
-
1
u o L w U L L o f i é ] J u v A I D Y 4 9 4 1 J 2 y J O ] e J o A e s A q U M O U Y v G p o U u y v s g 2 2 1 4 ] “ S 2 W e U o y u l Z u i d o j a a a p s y u y p y n a p O M ] * x 2 ] d u 0 3 u R q i n u e s o u ‘ A J 2 1 G B ] 2 9 S ) s u m v s v u e ‘ w e i n d i p u e y y “ ( 6 ] p u e Z y g w o r e s e c r e j e g j o w e d j e y i d e s j e n u a p i s a y “ A r n j u a . “ A i n q u a d Y y y 6 W I J s e j o D j o 2 j d w i a y } - 1 a ] n w ‘ 2 1 3 U 2 9 [ e h o y U I U I p e s e s u T p I a q * x 2 ; d w o D Y E ] I Y I U l 2 1 J U D D 2 A I e I I S s e s u e n u T U O D ‘ A i n j u z 9 Z u I A k I A ‘ 2 4 9 U I D s N O I I ] > I 1 ‘ S 2 J J S N p u U l [ e J o W p u r e
A
-O
P0 SS
OZE .
7I
I1
e
e
A
) I
O0
PSs
oIz
a u
a
. l
e d
a
G
e|
S
|
]
~
— s
D O
P
O
S
s p O U T I - :
u p a d S 8 6
p
o
a =
a —
yLa8 ( « j -
t si ] — s v d a p o u
r
J ] P O U A Y $ 8 6 - 0 S 8 D p n w e p n y ( n y y N u w J O ) r e s e A r e y e g - e y q u i n y ] ) ( u r e u 0 y
y
D i
=|.
P O
~ —
0 S 8
g -
U0
0
9
w r u “ a n p e e
s o I S I F Y
P I Q .
p o y y ) u
p )
( p u s s e u i n q
u e g
u ]
p u e
n p e u
i n f
( i n a e i (
u e y )
[
v e
7— y
gu o e
d1 p
vs u
sH 2 s
s0 x
o
2
T A
r
y
“
O
N | |
g
i
t
O M ]
s M p
y g q O V v U i I q u e q I N
‘ x 2 | d u r 0 o > m y
s u m v s y p u u e
P A P U E Y - e
j 0 7 ] e 2 I 9 9 1 A " 2 4 9 U 2 9
a } d u r a y -
n j n y x y 2 ] d u r2 os >)
2 1 q
R ]‘ A l S o U “ E p
b b P U P
( 1 6
j u e y r
2A pp o gJ O a A l y
‘ p o s p uu ny y z y
- e d d e n a
e u r }
I s n oJ
yO r s 2e 4m}) “ J I U
j u e
y s ( A p o g
p a p Uu ln o y
s i y a
u e q i n x
2 j d u2r9 os >)
2 1 9
e‘ ]I A ‘ O U ( € Z ‘ . .
=
y )
e p
- I n j e d e l e r
e
l
;
-
e 3 U P U I I P 2 A - U P A R I O F )
l
a a p e y e u r
i
e g
‘
w e y e s u e w | ' A o y s e u
u
e
- n u e s e q u y
u
e
(
t a d p e u 2 ¢
l e - e a k 1b i p p
e r e W R | w w r e
“
)
]
T
U
T
u
o
j
a
u 2
e j
n p ( t
n
i
We
s
u
r
e
d
e y
s y
u e
j
r,
ue a
ey
y
a
A
y
4
y
u
E O O P E u o u v u s s o
f
v O p y u sg pv e w i g s n k i u y ] Y O p v u g O u U I i g t i u v v G p y u q o V uU i I g G i u v V @ 9p v u y v i g v u r p v aO a \ U qI n t i u vo ys l y p e y U v
P a n a n u I V
: O V u t S V N
Pc ]
i
J |
A
T
I &
S
O
“
T T
d S T S E
e O O
o
h
I
-
u y A i
p»
O S
C
) I L ]
q e ) e s A N
d y j x
s a n p a A I n e u e p r s a i n A A N [ e
I a I N
W r w U
P
e a
y .
u S
e
D
P a
d i i t O S
T I - S 8 6
yg q
e w e y y y - e 3 U
e
u g
u U a
] )
l A
a p e y e w
u
w e ] e s u e
W
W e s
J
e su (
g e/
a Tp o u r y o
i
) 3 7 ) ) U I U P A Y d i p i a r y d u s a r y ) u e d
i
e j O 7 ) W e ] p u e
s p- d a g ] 8 6 - 0 5 8 U I W E I I I L a n s 2 u e I 1 9 e u e A e J E w e y y e d ( w e y e d A
Mi $ M (
o I
P
s
r
w
9 /
u
)
d 0 0 I
- N
e 8 y
P 5 A
0 E
I
I
N
q A
P O H 7 8 ) u s a p o y y ) ( 1 7 =1 4 1 8
1
n k y e y w e j j o y ( a n d a y 3 u r y ’ )
)
I n a n p e g w e } j O y O ( N j o ) s I y w e O
F
( a n d a j 2 u r y D
)
w y w e j j o y i n y i e j e y e i 0 y ( a n d
i Y n w a
I
O ie y
Z
F u u
p r
y
N )
P
| “ 7 “ € ‘ f b
g
u
lq
OjUl uu
oy O
O p j U I QO e
vGp
Js
y
nG
u
i
q
u
n
v
v pi g
| s n
G i
u v
|sn (iuv
S
V O
p p m u q u i g a n G i u v J
v
G
p r u y r g
U I
v
u y p v a a d
o s |
y
u n t i u n y U s V A V E YN I
/
u
“ - r
- A p s a m n j e s y e x e J U L I N p e Y ] w e y e s u e w ( w e y e j u e m m p e y p y ) - I p s a m n j e s e y j e w e l e y
w
( w r e s o p e w r y e s g ) P s e A Y E S ) I N p N u r e s e y x x e S ) ( a n y y e u I p a a m r n u y R e U s r e ] N e A I S e u ( e j s A e u d e y j e s u e w W e ] e s u e W I p r a m n y e s - P U P I E Y Q R U I e I A I A w e y e Z U e U T I P r A I N y e D - I p s a m n j e s e n f e r e d y - j e m m a r u / r w y e j e s u e w - e p u e e w e l e y / u e m n d w e e Z u e W I p r a r n e r e i n d i u e w r y y s e A u a e s y w e i n d e j o - e 2 u n i o / n y ( u s e j o r p e1 )
i
e
y
e
s
u
e
w
w
w w e
e j y o y
m y e [ e y
Q a n d
a j s u r y D )
w r } j o y
e w e
( j o o r y
Y O N )
w i e j j O y
s w e
( Q o o r y
y u O N )
r e i j o y
m m d t j e y
( j o 2 7 y
Y O N )
j j o y - l
k e u e p y
( n p e u -
e w u e g )
( j o d 1 y
Y O N )
a
,
v
y j
4 4 4 1 0 1 u
U D A g I Y
u o r j
y w u s s o f
u
é n G i u r I E S P o t “ d e
U
s
3
o y u I i n
G i u v ]
v O p y O j v
Uu ly m g
‘ a n t i u v
s v i i l u
v
v G p r u Og
Uq Iu i g
s n t i u v v O p v uO
gU vI i g
4 n G i u r s n t i u y
A
P
x
I |
2
|
J
|
|
t T I
Aa S E
l O S
P
o - O
I
T
S
O
-
I
= Z
S
AgO
a g
o M Ia Td ] p o l u O S T I - S 8 6 Y E P E L L / A w e y p e a n a s y i m j e m n d e u e , e y y e a n u t y ) T e y e u U e U U e A N I ( t e y e u r e u u e a n d t y e s o p u p e e u r y e s g k e u u q r k e s/ eu ur e' ds , d s e d r e p y ) ( { } A o y s e u u e U I n i i e y ) I A S p e‘yW eD u u U R A R j e / s a p e u r e d t e | e a n d t( ¢j)n d d e s s e q u i n i a
p r w t un
aw s ep
e( e i
y w
y
e
w g
/ i
n
i
)q u
8 ) A A I n
S (
0
-
d 6
]a 8
Iu $
o
p
9
0
0
-
8
o S
{0 y
P e
p
n
A
] N
) 1 S I
q
y -
I
A I 9 ®T Li l P s v C D
O
N P I O J V I U ]f u x a p o p y ) ( i 7 t 4 C U
Q T
W e } J O m u e A I W N p e N Y O ( N J ) 0 2 7 y n p e N e u u y Y O N ) ( J o o r y
l
N p e N s n d r e u e g
Y(
r y w i s e s p u s l e y t y n o g ) n p e u r j e , ( j o o r y i p e d d e j o g u n s ] ( s o o t y y y n o s ) N p e N y s n d u e n y ( s n a e l u e y )
“ T Nj
‘TT oo 2 ‘ € ‘bl ST
s
)
7
y
l
O l u O U O U I O U I o 1 u l
p v v v p
i O O O G
a p y u q u i g | a n G i u y p p u q u i g | s n G i u v p y u q u g a n u ] p y p u q u i g s n | G i u v p r u q n i g s n G i | u v
(
e j o o e A z e l y w / d i n d e ,
(
e u r e a n y q u y ( t a a p e y e u r ) - I p a a m n y e s w e y j e s u e w ( t u e a n y q ' ] ) e y e u e u e l ‘ w d ( w e i n d n y ] t , ) e f e s r y p e l e y - I p a a m n y e s w e j e s u e w 1 p n a s e u u e y y )
n
y
e
g
)
(
r
Te
ed
Je
ej
]j
|a
Ia
An
Ma
Ut
Ty
T)
‘
o
9
p
u
e
l
e
‘
o
c
s
o
u
‘
A
l
a
e a
y I
r G
u e ]
e
p
n 2 9
n S
e y p e s u
T
e A e s s e l ( 1 y y e d e s t y o n a t y ) m n N s p e e Q N ( A 1 J 2 y > 1 p u o g ) e d r e u s e d d n j i , ( A r s a y > t p u o g ) I N I N E P A E E A U ( 3 Y o I d N r O y S ) a “ n p e u e j e a ( a n a e ( u e y ) n G i u v J B W Y I O I O j
F
“ o “ L I “ g ] “ 6 ] U e ,
s
s
s
O
I u y p e r a
m
O D
A G u o u v u s s o f ‘ a m v S v u v p y - U I W I e I ) s 2 1 3 0 9 2 - [ B q ) “ ( j e y I 1 d e > B u r a [ E I D I Z-UUI3 DU I - [ @ q p u e u m v i v u v y 1 0 d - a s q n s ) u a n b u v a i v s v u A r e r ( p j i z s 0 q d n s s n w G i o u v y ] I I ] e d
S Z I d
A T
}
e a r ] p u r e a r ]
3
}
y
p u e O s |
y
p
o
u
O
- n
T o
E ‘
S
. O
SA
M
O
P
I * . -
T
S
O
-
I=
Z
l S
ea O
r
o
D P
D
B
.
o s
I
D
u 6
w 8
S
-
y I
i
c
i S
T
l s dd O
A yT e
Ni e
L fN gp P ‘ a
T u
o
u
8
5
0
-
Ml 8
6
Pi 5
y
P y t
o l [ e 0 5 8 - 0 0 9 w e i n d i n u r y ( w r e r n d i s u r y ) a w e i n d e j j e w e - n d e j j e w e y y ) - U n i y y N j e y x y r n j e y y n s i y ) e s u n y y T E A N I I S ( w e i
P w R n
( - I w d
p e e r q i u / ) a p o y y ) ( a m a s s w e i o y - 4 Z ( a n d a j Z u r y ) u l n p e u w e i o y ( a n d a j Z u ( r w y e ) s ) n u p l e u i m m p y e j e y e w [ e w e i e y o i y ( a n d a y Z u r y D ) e y e s u e w ( j 0 r y s u u t , )
u s y y u 2 1
F I
O .
m
u
m
u m y
Y
O
N
)
N
O
| 7 “ ¢ v
s
e
u
y
s
e
y
e a
d s
d i
e t
- e Z e u r
p
w e s u r
P o w
e‘ gI I I p u e
w e
s e s e u
e y e s
n p o u
v
1 j 9 u
v s t y y i
7 )
u t s p o u e g p u e A ] A y e s Z u r n j o e j n u e
w
2 7 ) u U 2 9 w
o s
p o u s g
I l l m p s v
1s0y} n y
u e q i n
x a j dj
uor o s
- n y y n w e p n y
2 2 )
( ¢ ) r e d e d r e j e g 2J(‘]{ oq ue 7
y
o
u
p
e
w
e
u
e
i
m
i
-
( e j (
p o w
. e d e
A o y y n u t P u e w e p u o y ) e p u r j e s e y w e n d s n d e j o y )
j
t
n
a w
( WeStpeaenut
i
n ~
d J
y e E W
T d I
j y e
N e I
I S E
w e
l i n y
1 e y y
N I n N y
7 )
Y N o s )
( Q o s r y p u r e
|
n p e u e
n p e u
m w u y
seeliez
Q
o
e
o r y Y
x u e w iy
( 1 e d 1 p e
a n s t y )
py
N
m
W I N Y
p
u
e
w
s
u
e
e
s
s
-)me
]
nad soe ( u r e s 3peuuenuyi ]
e p e S u s a W r
( Q
J o o r y Y O
q i I N n i } 0 N
a y y [ N y O S ) (anae(ue]) N p
e u
U I I n
i y
i y y ( s
0 0 n
ne jp ees
uz u e
)
1g
4
)
w
y o
e r e u o u v u s s o f
u
W e s e Z e u - b s ) ( s y u e y s
i
i p e d d e s e y u e
s
p u z e e u l w u v o j y ,
e G
u O e s E g r e y w e s s v Iu ] e g
B r o
I _ e Z u P
Z
S
O
-
I
E
: S
aS O
r6
b
o
c
I
T
i O S
I
-:
Z=
O S
:v O
e
a
e
“ " .
6
8
S
-
I
e d I I ] O S
T
e
P
. a .
P e g H T $ 8 6 - 0 S 8 [ e I N A ns Te r ]e s e A L I E“ SE YU ] w e i n d i u e w ( u r e j o x p y e n q ] n g ) n f r e - l e e Z A e u t e d u e ’ y - U d { E I E I I
A
‘ u r e r n d e s p C P O U L A r I N w r e i n d e j o 7 ) r e q u r e ‘ )
(
1 i
s E
(
e T
- ‘ u
r
S E
I
)
9 |
0
0
-
s 8
e 5
D 0
eO
p
|
1 ]
«
i e n E Y y
1 u u p
I P 1 U O D P I O [ P 4 0 u f ) u s e p o y y ) ( i e w u r g n p e u Y U O N ) ) ( j o 2 7 y ( u r a T e S ) i p e d s d ee rZ ee e y e I U E I N ‘ N p e U r j e a e x t m n q p u e z u g ( Y j n o o a r s y )
A1
2 a
9
1 =
N
O 0 ] T l “ Z ]
SUVLVSVU
D SB
U
I
T DATOS -nyynwepny
u l v
A
T
U (
v u
M OS|E3 4) ‘ o
d
e] L
MI JO e]
O I q‘
P 1
pig 2UO 2
105
y c9r9egs)e drejeg
y
w ~eurtepiani
w e i n d e n i p e l e y ~ e u n d t y ) ( U a n i p e u e w w e i m n d e u r y ( a n j i o y 1 2 ) w e i n d e n i p y ( u r e u r y p s i e y y i ) ( w r e u e d e d d n a r y ) ( w r e u e y e d d n u r y ) u n d e a t s ( n y e A r e a n u t y ) e i m d u e s a y e r e g a l e e a t Ipny ( ipna J t N p U a | I a T ) r e u I ( T rm yp)r u
s
n
y
e
a
e
u
n
d
i
y
u
t w
y r
‘ e l
‘ N p
I
e
N
u
V
i p e d
d r e u n ;
( j o 2 7 y
Y y I N O S )
‘ b l
g n p e u i
y e w u s y
( a n
a e f u e ] )
“ S T
) n p e u
t e 8 h o g ( a n a e l
e s I N y y T
e I ( W ) A
9l
( a n
a r ( u e ] )
‘
n p e u
1 e 8 h 0 g
LI
(ana
‘
A e
$
(
I
- ue w N ] r ) p e l w
J
p i
e
e n
j
y
T
i y (
y
m s n y a
nm
‘ 6
e
p
f
ue
u
su
e ( a n a
e ( u e y )
y
e
)
]
!
a
y
Y i
Y u
D u
1 9 4 1 0 j u v a y r y I _ u o r j v U L L o f u y 1 p e d d e s e q - u e 3 e e s u U E S ‘ M D U D A T I
U
‘ w v G l u v y o , w s ] n y t 4 v a n i l i
n
e J e j e w u“ rW ye s u e s W e y jU el p e r n g P o u e ‘d Ag I Y T P u e H s a y s Ue ld P O L I q p j o d v a y
S
Z “
p
u ‘
¢ I
O gA
-
I
E e
S
O
e
I
T
S
O
-
=I
Z
S
O
e
e
e
li
i ,
e ) y e )
lI a] q $ 8 6 - 0 5 8 P e
g
‘ I m a n j e d u r n s
3 g
- I e p u e y i u e A y n d e d ( i n a n j e d d e j
a y
w e i n d e p u e
y i
- n d e p u r y t | e , ) - n d e p u r a r i e y ( 1 e i J o y U E I I A
/ )
o i
P e
w
e
s
e
e u r
(
9 d
0 l
0 e
- w
g8
]w u a 0 5
o
p y
P I U O D [ P U L 0 I I H ] u f ) p o y y y ) ( 1 7 1 4 3 5 1 E Y W e i i n y - y - e L I U N e 2 u n y i f ) e u e j e a ( 1 f e d e s r y s n u t y ) ( 1 1 y e d e s r y o r u t y ) n y x x e [ e y n p e u F ( t j a a y o u n u t y
. u s a n N p I p
I
Q
e
A1 I P
e
r
8 s
9
7
N
O 7 )
«
S
0 “ O
Z
ae u Z Z
nw ep “ [ Z
r
i
u
g j
e d d e s e y u e s u o n e u o p A q s s o w a y ) n 3 u o y p o u s g d o p y A s e y i p o u a g A ]
i
p
w e s e d e
u
i o f s y u e
y
j
o
e f u e s p u e s u o r s a s u t e j e
s
u o n e s u r
u
j ]
I
I
” m ‘
y
o
o y I p n y
y
e j o s e p
u
n y y ) r o u n i
y
d d n a r y
n a e [ e y y r U u r L x I p n u r w n y y w e i n d e j o y ( u s e y e j e y ) - e j o d e p
u
P d s e r e - y e A A ) - 1 8 2 q e u r j e
d
( u e p u o y I
p
- n d e a a
p
‘ e a u e p u r i e s ye e i n q u i e s
e
n y 1
d q y
e w
e
e d
V H s e w (1epuesey)
S
|I
y
s
e
u y
z y
s n
e p
u o y i o y I ) )
p u 7
I m i I y n p e uul e p e S u r s a n y J o y e ) u l A w n u 2 g t p o d d e u e q ( 1 0 0 1 1 4 ) N p e u I p e g U l - e j o d e N p e u r R y j e u A l - P j O D e p w e j e p u e w ( 2 1 0 ) e q u I T O i m A i e u e g n p e u e l e r e l e y n p e u e j e a Y U O N ) ( j o s r y
w l
u
“ € Z ‘ p 7 “ C Z
y
u
f I
ao U
s O
rL I
u I
ev Y
s1 j U R
o J
u S
)
0
7
Z I _ ] I I
q
S
O
-
I
E
aD O
S
A
uV
t
T
S T “ ‘
O
-
=I
P O MA
l
O
S
Z
s s e l e y e p u n s u e a r s A y
)
e w i 1 ]
P o aI I ] O S T 1 - S 8 6 w e i n d e d e " ( 1 p e d j a y ) - n d e j o o e: s s e t y e I s o q - e } j e d e p u - e p u n s ) e s U P A E U E A ‘ w e i n d i a s p ( 1 0 3 3 8 ) i n d i s n yy e a u ) “ ( n p o 8 u a s . n
w e s w e ( u r
8
5
0
-
e] 8
6
oI$
p
9
s 0
e 0
n 8 -
h
a
0
5
g
s /
i e
n d
A
9
F
AL I
P A U C D
=
P I O
[ P L O T
|
a n
u s p
o y y ) ( u s i p e d d e u e
q
u
i
u
t
n y n
p e uul - e j o d e p u o
3
u
e
w e
y e p u e w
Y O N )
( Q o o r y
I n A I
e y O w e i i n y
u
t
- e p u e u l t p
u
e
g
‘ w
e y u r ]
n p r u o y ( t e y o y x y N p n g
)
o f u n s y n
p e uu l e y e j u e m n p e y
n p e u
e j e a - e W e y ) ( w e m n d e u j e u
at
( u r a y e s
)
O
N
- 9 7 7 “ g z A
q
e
j
j
“AB2Iy) u e j d
]
-
a
j
e
)
“ANM
W
G
o
U
s
YT
J
4 n t i
u
v
U l I a j a
y
Y
s a d d
o
d
r e p u
jn
og
azjU29 U s e
d
0
OSTY s l y 1 4
But O
o
j
yAii¢n]j ua>
(
, e
, u
e e
e y o l o - n d e g e j Q ) w e s n d r e a e i e g ( u r e s e a r A e u e g
)
- n d e y s o u r e s
h
w e i n d e y j e
u
( w r e s n d e s t f e ,
)
q u y [ A o y ‘ w e j e y e u r n r y I A d ( s e q u r y ) ( w e j e w n a t y n u r r u y w e i (n¢ d) e j o >
a a s p e w w r e ( u r e s ‘ u e s “ e D e U I e I H w e n I p
d i j O ['4oy)
n P
- -
)
r
d
s
e
> y
e d e f u r e j
o
e p u o
y
u e y )
n p e u J O u l n p e u me w i k n o O p e u Y I N o s ) ( j o o r y i m A t e m nn pg e u y a n o s ) ( j o a 1 y m n y y p e u n s r n y p e u e w i o n p e u - e p u o 3
u
w e y e p u
e
y i n o g ) ( o s r y s e q U I y N p e UuI ~ e y e
a
p e u ( i n a e
(
e j e q u i n¢ p e u ( s n a e ( u e ]
Ie n
mi
E
e s ] e g
E E
u l u t )
‘ O ‘ T C ee pt
A
A
I
y I
4 3 4 1 0
j u n a g y a y u o n v u s o f
u
1 a y \ o u y
u v i v s v u
y e r s
- V I P e W I
e
- N W I
N I T ]
w e Js u t n
y n p
p s U u lo l
] U 2 s 2 U 0 ] T
s u o n
d i d s u t
w i n e s
e y e s u e g
u m s v S v u Y
O ] D ) I W
( s y u e yp su e
e A l y e g
( s 1 2 A e 2 m
)
_ a
I p
S Z U e }
O
-
I
E
Aa
gO S
u
o
P
I
T
S
O
= -
I
p o It Ie ] p o t
A
s
I a g
O S T I - S 8 6
O S
=Z
n y s e r e M - e y g e l e r e p n i , w e i n d e s e y u e d n y ‘ i p e d u e z e y y ‘ - n d e u r d e s e u e s
t ,
I p n y I o 1 e ] ] ( i p e q u r e u e y y ) - e y n y e y u-i s e c e l w e i n d e y e y ( w e s n d i y e 3 u a s )
y
n y
m m s
e
w
‘
8
5
0
-
g6
]a8
It5
o
p
9
0
0
-
g8
a5
|u0
o
p
E
LA I P 1 0 ) P I Q [ 7 7 1 4 0 1 1 n u ) u a p o y y ) ( p u j i q m A r e s e s u n i t y N p e u U U I e A L J e S y T U P W I E U Y I S - P j P A n p e u ( I n a e ( u e y ) e y e N p e u ( a n a e ( u e y ] 1 n d J 2 § w e i i n y - e 2 u n y o / N y
e
j o > e j e A n p e u ( 1 n a e ( u e y )
G = u l
N )
O E C E
C O L
“ “ “
q u
‘ u m v P s O v D u y p y ‘ y e q d e 2s 2 1 4 ) S u mU yl F y u2 4 ) y i T ] A i n j u a > P l r j o p e g U I 9 M I
9
s e a e r i y e g p u r s e j O d 4 1 6 ) ‘ ( A r n j u 2 9 “ u r s i p e d d e s e y u p s v i
v
p u e s e A r f u e Yy Te a
)
( A a n j u . e I p U d l e r “ e U I P A U T N j I e D - d e ]2 es s1 O Y ) ( s i 2 [ e a p 1 2 p u p ) - n 3 u 0 y s e j o > W o y W Y ) 2 2 ] y z ] ( A i n j u a > p o d u SnU GL y) m a t ( p a r p u u l n y z y a y ) a e ] e j o y p o u a d ( A l )
c
i
y u
u e sy e i y e m m a e ( u e y ( i n a e ( u e y ) - w e i n d d n i t y d i q - d n i i y ) ( w r e A i q u r e i n d I M R A N ] ( s n z e a n s i y ) ‘ w e i n d e l e r e l
e
n u e p y “ U l Y D ) ( w e s n d e s e q - n d e y e j u e j e
s
- e j u e j e z u i c ) ( w r e i n d e y
e e a
t r
w s
e
w
u
e
5 ) )
2 y y
é t t
e u u
n y i n y r e u r r y > r ) r y o n
i li s A s
m a e u e y w e i ( a n a e ( u e y ) u y w r e i i n y ( a n a e ( u e y ) m u e a n i t y w e e y p p r n p e u ( a n a e ( u e y ) m u e p y n p e u ( 1 y e d e 2 ) ~ e a n j j e e d d n p e u ( 1 y e d e
e p j e a ( J i p
i e
i t
u
n
y
E e
‘ 6 T
‘St ‘OP 4)
3 9 ,
g s c a a t t e
S Z I
u o u v u L s o f u y I e j e w u E y ( s u e s i y i e )
‘ p
o r t e d m v i v 1s0y} n y
u e q
i n x a j djuor o > J L A O y‘ I2 e 3 9 U U R L Y
2 9 S )
> 1 q‘ "J ] ‘ o u ( Z
j e h
o y - P p i s a I — a 1 3 u
a
9
2 9 u J 2
O a 4 } B ] O D
e
A p u e g ‘ s k o r a o 1 a
w e g J
o 2 4 } u e q i n x 2 ] d u J r O 0 > . - r e u U R Y
]
[ t h
o y “ p n u e s e q u
i
y
w e s
p u e I A D P E U I I g
2 2 S )
2 1 4‘ 2J 1 ‘ o u ( Z
O
-
T
E
S
d
: APPE O
I
T
I
e (
S
O
-
=I Y
aA l O S
Z
I N E
S
o e A e y
P S l
I a
Y u
r eA O S T I - S 8 6 U P W e ,E
Y
( 1 9 9 1 N y x y I e E p w e i n d e sP
p
o - P 1 9 I A D p E Y e U s a m n j e d ( w i e j e s u e w ( 1 a 2 p e u t s 2 ¢ )
P J p
d I
e
w
A
P
e
) U
8 b
S
0
-
s 6
eF 8
cP $
c
a
|
9
0
0
-
s 5 8
tF 0
O
a
|
A t , t ]
R u s u T u
D P ( a
P I U M
O
j i u ) p o y y ) n p e u n p e u ( t y 2 a
j
s
a
P 1
9 F
AF Ll T O : u
p
W N W
-( 1e
]]2]a@qy2 )u T u T ]
w e
n
d
) a y ) u t e j o
D
A s o d
b
W N W
)
b b
“ ‘
c g
Wu)u
v
y
} ) e O
D
s a
r
i
s v ] p a v“ pA
r9
‘ ( A p o g “ t i e d $ 1 9 U J3 OI 3 I 1
0
s —a pBt s i n O [ 3
S
4 G l u r“ p1 y9 ,0 u ) ( A p o g e u r i i e d d
e
y (
S
s
v
>
r p } y
u a O e
j s i s u M j u
y
s
p u a t e y
, ) y
e d d n a
t
u
r e s y i ,
e c y e e
VI HT
A
- n d e j o
o
(
a n j e q ) ~ e p u o y y e d
i
w
e
i n d e j o o ( r e s r f e u r n a
t
w e u e a
r”
( @ e O 1 ] N g “ e a r y j e
duu
n d ( i
i
i e q u i a , )
I S
s e
u )
w
e
r e s
u
)
) ) ) >
yy o y 5 y D T O
m m A r e ; N p e uU I m p e j e y w e i
o
( a n d a j 3 u
r
n p e s u e w n p e u ( a n d a ; 8 u
r
n j o y l e y r u Q i n d a j 8 u
r
- l i n u r e d r e s s e a j e N p p e e n u ( 2 4 0 3 e q u
I
I
b D b
S O 8
‘ ‘ ‘
‘Lb
ruengquauipyy
a
u U
o
n )
v
u 4
s v
o a
Z I
f
u s
n
u i n 24)
S u
4jO u
2u- i(psapuroeys pun(‘gy2syz'u yto) s ruZoais eziuezio
4vT p
1 0 a a
aO
S E
y
I
T
S
O
-
=I
Z
S
O
)
T
]
wI
eN
pI
se U
6 A ad
8 R tr
S U dy
- E nn
T I sweueyed -P A e i ( 1 [
S TU w “
O U u w
- e ‘wemndeyeyx P U I N } e i
| Ec D o e y n y n s u n
y a y eZun
e
j
j
o
o
IOH
d
EY[ ] N ( E Jr yU eE L jN I e) E u I s
N I I I J E A L
I ( ) I e
‘ I [ N y
C y I EZE
-
S O
w
[
e
N
]
y
e 2
n d e j o > ( 1 e p e l ]
e N )
e
Z
U
e
U
I
I
e
p
e
l
|
e
N
]
F
1
5
1
0
1
L
) m
P
P J -
M e r e P I P I O n u s ) (u1s7a1pjo [ A e a y e u usy1/q) e } U W j l e e l l ] i n e j o o e p u o y t p e n p e u r j e ( r e y o y x y N p N g r e y y e d u e y e E x I 2 W < n p e - e p n U i l n , p e - e r e q u e d e y g e l e y i n o n s p ) e u e j e Q o s r i n d i e s e u n d i ( i n a e ( u e y ) n p e
y y d a) gu u s ay y u
L ON ‘ 6 0S TS
9
Y
A
R
U
P j O D - “a U1 9d e u e d e s e u
l
2 7 9 1 0 J O “ U P N U e w s[ Ie] a i p ( P a r i [ e d ) s j u e y Ys aI yM y 2 4 ) M u r A r I y e D , y u e y s s a u ) ( g s 2 0 u d U M O U Y W o o l y 2 y } 2 y i ¢ ] A i n j u a > I p e d d e s e y u e g w m v U i 1 p ) v u ( A i n j pu uz 9e j u e y s i o w A u o j o > T ) ( A a n j u a >
I & 2 1 ) e m& a 0 e A j s e y i ¢
( s a
]
5
s
r
a
y e )
a d )
m m d r e s y e u n s i y - e u r A e s e u r u
r
e n d ( a n d r e y e u n s t y
)
‘ t y y o d j e a n s r y ~ e r e y y a s e p
e
e n d - e u j e y ) p u e ( w i e d e a r s - P U L I P A I P U R K Y S w e y e( se uy e w I p 2 a r e n s j s e e d ‘ w e j e s u e w - e p u o y n s u o y ‘ w e i n d e j o s l e j e M I p N y i e y “ U E p u o y y e A A
/
( r e y e u n a t y
w w A
e
3
1
) )
y y
t t
e u n s i y a e ( u e y ) Z e u r i n y e d e s r y o r
u
i i n y e d e a r y o n
u
d r e s ( i n i h u e ( 1 ] 7 w e ( 1 1 y
n ( Q
i p
s
e
u u m A
r
e e
p p
n n
S S ) p S
C B ‘
W ( 2
I 1
e u A J w ( g i u p o 2 3 u 2 9
a e o r p u u s o f O u p s v s p e i n d e j o U P A E T I I A n j e y ) ( u o n u s U e j o > n
u u o u O 3
y s y ] e w e s S E I | e ) 2 p e w s y e s t u o y )
O
a S
E
I
d -
O S ,
a Z
|
I
_
=
O a
P A o l d S Z I - O S I T y j e w e u n g ] ] e - w e u 0 0 g ) - w i r J j O u n g ( T e - e u E w I U g y w e m n d e j o > - e u u r y ) ( w e i n d
D
I M O p ( p u Z u U I - e
A I F EA LI P r e w a r n u ) s i w a q p o y y ) n s j e r O e [ N y N P e U e r j [ O e D A j o d e p u o s z u e d e ( w r e j e p u e w ( a n d a j 8 u r y > ) n p e u e A e Z u r y ( 2 1 0 } e q u I T O 7 D )
6
“
9
¢
P”wm“
A e eA yy ¢ ¢
p
u
jn
o
Tgy
U
L
A
n
g
u os t u s s p e jw O w e e u ) i e j d n y J o ( j u g 2 2 4 m s j u e y Ys Is Mo 2 u y ) 2 7 9 1 ) J O B A R I A L
D
‘ p a a ut ty a y ) - d i s s s
u
r
v o y J O I e s e y x y A ] H i e d 2w2 e8 a) n j o g ‘ o u ( ¢ 5 s v I JM OL V F y J N 2 y Y I O s 2 z ] JU 72 e 9 O S T E “ U I U W “ ‘ p Y2 u 0 N Z u l A r a M 2 1 2 9 2 U d0 I} 2 ® j 2 y e s e y y a s e i n y w e u e j j e d ‘ u n de iS u re q N ‘ u m v S y ue A I | O S S e A I T E S ‘ ( S I 2 A P I M ) B u U I A R a2 4 ] U 2 9
y
) r
s
a g
( 4 n s 2 q ) i n g j i e z e p e y ( s n e s e p e
y
- e a a p i j o
u
d u t y ) ( w e p n 3 u e s
e
- e l i e d w i n i
2
A t j n d d ~ e q u i e p r y d
)
n m
g i m
a e s
n w e
s w
(
)
> ) q
o y
i t e
u u
q Q e -uekeygeles e e j p o n d i e t p , u oyiesuey
) } e n d npeu
u 2 1 0 ( u npe(ureejyeaO-xeNspeny g)
e (
p leurejt2g
n
g m
a o
n
s
Y(IjNOOD7Sy)
“ 7 ¢ " 8 S “6S “99
]
L
r y o f i
ss
as
vu
un
jn
o
u
0
1
4
2
1
I
Z
S
O
-
I
E
S
t O
sA
u
o
p
I
I
S
O
-
=I
Z
a g A J — O S weindiaspey IPr q p M y i E p N g O
l
u
o
p
Frye
-dnyeluey)) (ipueALITA[()Lr AaOUya), (rese>{]y1)
U-PeUAlP URA (ured- 1UweeWIienUdReAyTNyUY UgST uAuNUIdsTA]n UITy weindejos
] ]
t i q
i s
O D [ v
o
( u
j
U - e
P 1 9 8 A1 l
P I M
O
« N = P
I Q y u p u s a p o y y )
“
E n
1
x p
9
r I
Y(
u 2
3i
W
0n 2o7sy)
n p e u i
n f i e i n g
( 3 0 2 1 y
Y y I N o S )
I W e l I N y
x I U U Z A
- E j e a I ] y
e U r e I I N S
( i n a e ( u e y
) n p e u
P A s p l
j o w
j e
n
A
m y
( i n a e ( u e y
) n p e u
“ “ 9
7 ¢
9 9
g
e
y
y
r
a
e
r
e
d
e
u
B J
J “
y
u j
t
a
d
W
O
y 1
e
2
j s
Z i
I I 2 d
Sd n
u o
2 u
1
y n y
e y e u e w p u s l
e
8 u a
y
a n y q
u
e y y i s e l “ p e ‘ w e y e s - n d e i r e P A P U R e j n y U A r j i 2 , ( a n ereq -t u u e t d y e ) y - e u r qeles -eanyquiy)
“ e U yp
w s - mn weind
e u
s e
e 3
w e)
A r e
s
1 wei“SnTdFeE dAr.e pra ( {tAvarep w i r a e inde(dwteau
w
y
e
l
s
n p u e r u , e ( u e ] ) W w e i i
n y
e j o d
e i p
u
r j e , a r ( u e y ) e y y n p e u a e ( u e y ) e s t y n p e u a r i u e
j e
p
i n
a
r y p e
u
( a
n
e z
u
( s
n
u s
r
( a
n
n ( a n y m
i p e e
y
e
)
t ]
u
"$9 ‘99 ‘L9 "89
a
y r
y
4 2 4 1 0 j u v a g a y
Z I _
u o r j v u L s o f
u
p s u o U l n U a u p e u o n dj to i d s u t w e A u e l e p s
f u
eJ ,O I n a n i e y
s a j e
p W o 9 4 3 - o 1 d u e N S I‘ I e l Ya D u y
A y r
e e s a c j e a t d e d p a uU IO n U- Ua! y s u o n w d i o n s j e p m p y n u r n
s
S
O ,
- A
I
E
a g A O S y
u e |
o l A y Y
o t a g d A l
p
O S Z I - O S T = I - e 2 u l s e s p u e
s
A i( n¢ d) - e Z e u r u lA ( u
e
- I p n y y - n d e j o s e p u
o
m m A n i e y ) ( I n i e y - e x e U R I :N p
e
n d - n i i y ) ( e p r a p j n u s
p e e
w r r e s s w
6 ‘
u
w
e
8 J O
S
-
I
t a I I ] O S
T
s
o
p
a
8
5
0
-
g 6
a]8
w[5
o
p
9
0
0
- e
u
a g
[ 0
5 8 e
o
p
e 2
e
t y ) e y i e
y
1 F ] 1 5 1 q r y > n
u
e y x y
r
S 4 s j
T P A U O D P I D [ v 0 1 y u n u s a p o y y ) ( 1 7 1 2 e e , e j e q u i ~ ) n p e u ( i n a e ( u e y ) e e Z u z s nA p e u ( y p e d e m u e p yn p e u n p e u e F e r r y a p e ( 1 y p e d e s t y
1A o
n
8 u
9 « = t y
O
N
6 9 O Z [ /
)
“ “ “
u u
-UI v s
v
v s
v
9 9
i s U
UI
wio1j
u
v
u
v
2y 1
}
y
a
psuoKUayy r
suondis , e r l a
e i u
k i B
k
e e
jepropynurnyy
-euewessues
(wreurnjoy)
)
yy
* n a.
r
r u
r
p weind
dd
dd
ee
s ) u r 8 u ANI -euedeseeuuerd(sue2rs>ee)r uneds >))
e n e i r u ( r -)
u eA
n u2
i r/
( ( e s1 0 j
I e(
n p
u u
e e
n p
e E D n‘ po-weeuur(wennpwiontwsy t)y o y wreind
) ) t
y y a
O
W e I I N Y
“
e [ e 1 2 y ] n p e u r j e a
(
e d e s r y o n u t
e
np
py e u
(
1 7 e d e s t y o n u t
(
—
W
r
(
1 q y e d e s r y o n
2
2
0 7 e q u I T O D ) ( r e m m p e y )
M A R I j U l n p e u 1e0p yt e y e j e u eiiey n i s e d r I [ e N a p r e p u e p 1 y e d e s r y o n t y ) r e y e l T y e l i n y y ) m u n y I I f e A NT e ps eI eUy ( n d d e s e d e p e ,
L
L n p e u
‘
C "eZ 74a ‘SL OL
L
e
e
de
y u
y
e
i
a 4 3 4 1
0
2
j
u v n a a
Y
O S E T - O S Z I
u
o
v u s o
f
e
a
c
r
t
"
A I A w r e
i
e
Sp eu
ye
y
s u r e m d e j o > ‘
p
j
o
d
su
en
yG p S I U
w e u e j j e d2 i7 s 3 u a2 q9
p
e
p
uA nq o j
- e Z u e U T e y I eA )u e
I
y
I“AP
j
O
‘dO T
P e l i a g é I
I
)
i a s n d e u e d e s e u I a g w e i s n d e u e A e
s
e
u
u n d e y e r y ) J E U T W I I C N y w e s n d e s e y y a s ( w e u e p e a c q )
p o lA U e I ‘ A I q u - e A ( 1 W e - E [
S T I
e
( u r e ]
e
S u e s s e r e
O
-
I
Z
aA
ql
O
S
t
o
p
6
8
S
-
I
aI I ] O S
T
o
P
8
5
0
-
e] 8
6
oI $
P
9
0
0
-
q 8
a S
|t 0
o
p
)
y
e
P I “ M O D [ ¥ 7 4 0 1 S 1
F ]
j i u f ) e p o y y ( ) I u s i
q
P Z E T ] e y ( t e m p e r
)
n i e p u n y - [ y - e w e y ) ( w e s n d e u j e
u
n p r u - n d e y j e u
r
u
9 8A 1I P I O u
s
U 2 ] n p e u g n p e
u
e w u
y
( w e l
1
P =
O
N
“ g / “ 6 Z “ 0 g
t
u
s
d
- e u r k e r e u r sl 2e yy o u y m m p js o v u I p n Uy rp y u e y u g n d s e r e I p n 3 u e p r u e y y e u r y n p e u p u e s v a n L i n u “ u U i d U p I y p a u Uot n 2 4 ) i t d i j e d s r e c e u o n d u i p n d u e y 2 , e v e ) , M v a v S v u - K A d | ( 1 p n 8 u e ] 2 , ) B u r $ ] ] 0 3 A r e k e ‘ u p i v s v u ( a n j e d e r y ) S $ 1 } } 2 7 P) U P S I Z A P I M - e J u e w r e i r y m m v i yp pu ye 2 4 ) Q I J a y u e Y e A e s t , B u t h a a$ y] ] 0 3 - u v i e p r y o 3 w e i n d e j o s - u e u r e s r y ) e y e d
e s e y p u u r
w A e e (
i j
r e ( <
t i i
‘ w
j o
t e
) d
)
y
e
r
u
u r
m u e p u n y - [ t f
e u
“ e w e y ) ( w e m d e u y j e
e
u n s u nn g p e u - n d e y y e u
y
w r e i i n y
a e
u e q n p e u
(
s n a e l u e y )
p s i e
¢ n ( w e m e s )
[
2
r
(
w
8
y
‘T8 78 €8
ISIPUPYIIIU
eAlyes
ere Zuthar]
uoupussofuy
pue
TO suvsvsyyy uyv(ssyIp2Aye 2m)
UO
s]]O}
weindekpueg
OSET-OSZI -IeJURA - eZueweZzuy) (epue=se yy)
A weIeseurUT
ipn-yPuIeEsAn g
PoP 1eZIpey| PUIeIYIA
SEITE SEITE
(use] (uesndeypey)
= weseseueul -ipuweedsdeesuenu3
OSZI-OSTI
Al
Pod
iT OSTI-S86
Pod
ac$8e6- 058
|
oe058 -009
(Puig
D [P"L0IStET
O npeu
¥
P I Hurl) npeu ( tj2ajouTuty npe ( u 1 j2ajounuty)( tj2aqaungt])
usepoyy) eAeyeing
PIO
epny iN
LI
PA
G
I = )
A
ON “cg 98 “18
C
O
C
l
l
C
l
O
l
O
l
O
e p e g l
> u
u
e
s
l
O
d y 1 p 0 } y a y ) x a j d uj ro o ‘ [ t A o y r - e w y “ w e i p n ‘ D u } r 9 2] ] ‘ o u ( Z — — r r c O O
e
y
s
v
1
4‘
—
w e j n g s e i e w e s n d e ( e s e ( ( w r e j n y 1 8 u r g ) ‘ n d e a r y [ e a t s s ) - e r e y y a s e [ n y w e iu nr d e t d a ( 1 ] 2 4 y 2 u n d t T ) - e A e p o s n p e r y y w e s n d ( 0 ] } > A ) i m u e p u t , m p r e - t u e= a y u e q i n - n d e p u e q e w d ( a — n u e p u t 2,9)s ) 2 — — — — — — _ _ _ — — — — — —
e e _
s w —
—
(wes —
—
—
—
—
.
)
y O
t
u
n
e y u a y n p e u ( t ] 2 4 j o u r u t y ) e n q p u e i u r , ( ] 2 4 j o u r u r y ) ( y a j o
u
r e w e n w p n e i u n y ( t ] 2 a j a u r u t y ) OE C O OEC
O
r e
s
t y u
se
np
|r a n
j
eA
(yPapurutentqpyyue )iu r a nE
8 8 0 6 I
p
e
[
‘ 1 6 ‘ C 6
68
y
u
G I O I C E . u o 1 p u s o f l e l I p n y 1 e S i e ¢ 2 s 1 0 y ) ‘ ( Z u i p e n w e 3 u n s 1 0 S ] ] 0 } P e e d A L W A s y u e Y y d W o y e j O D U O T ZU al 1 P p O l a g I p e s y ‘ 9 1 } U I -D I 9 U I s y u e Y W d o y e j O D u o i s e s p u e B j e J a y ] a p p u e k - s e W ] O D [ e I D I I W 2 4 ) U 2 9
I
Z
S
O A l
-
T
E
M . A i O
S
O
B
m
(uor08T I 0
y
)
S y
O e
- u
I u
u
A
p
T
y 3P o l
e d g A l . O S c
a e y ) u u
y ( a n A r
“ p e y m
6 i
12Y41C—) S 8 L T o y o
- T y
I E e
Fama a d L I L O S
T
P I I
I
-
u
hbee "
)
24 a P
l
e
a
-
U
e a n p e
s
p (
n
‘sxID
8
5
0
-
‘sarj o e i ] ua7$ 8
6
y } y )
P s o
m
s
(
-
Buipox
9
0
0
-
TL d $ 8
e{ 0
P
)
T i g e u
q
e A D )
O
P U N q u ) u s a p o y y ) ( P u
s
e i n w n p e u ( u n d e w s
y
y y n p e u ( s n a e ( u e ] ) e r e s u e d e p
u
- e q u i l o
)
F I e n p e 1 0
n ( 2
N|
O
O
C
| 7 ¢
RSeMaRemieAS AERS alRLS l
s p p e u r r ] “ J Q W I W O
D
e I 2 D 4 ) U 9 9 a p ‘ e 2 I 4 s e 3 p U I 2 S 9 ) 1 3 Y 2 I A 9 O U J T > ) ( s u e y ‘ s e g u o n d t d s u y
)
w o s - e y e h e u i d
e g
I j j e y e u Z u r u o n
u o
w
y ) 2 U R I0 }S I P J e a r y ( w r e j e a e y 2 1 Z 0 u 4 - i J p 9 e J s 2 y 1 ) s U T 5 l “ U U 9 e l y ( u o n d i u d s a ‘ s B 1 u 0 i F p ] e s y I 3 9 p 8 r ) y u r j e d r e
j e
y
j u a wJ aOp ( U e l e u ] r e - s ‘ y 1 e e n 2 i p p y y r e e e u s u r e , y uedeygeles
[ a sWtojseyAr ejeyy
npeuejea
g
y i
r i
- j o y i n d d
n a
( i g e u t a y ) - u e
e
w e d n y “ E U 4 P Y ) ( t e j i o y u e w t n
‘
i ( e g j ) e a r y I j j
.
e d e u e
s e y P
m t e s o g ( a n d t e s 3 q )
0 a w i
1 e
d P 1 i
n )
i ¢
(
> ) q ) q ) y q ) n g )
i t O 7 s e y u e y w u e p j n p
e q u e w d e d e o x
p e u 2 1 0 ) } n p e u y ( u n d ( u n ( u n e u ( r e n
Z
*n (
z
e
n
p
I e
A p y
I M A m “* - u r
e
}
e
e
u
o n v u L Z A P Y
U 2 9 q
3 1 3
U
U
I A 2
A y s
e
e
j
a
O D
(s J Jg )
S o U
s D w
o f O } D a yP o
u y S
U
S p
e W
)
I D
2
) o
y
¢ &
A
O
S )
E z
P T - r y
e e O S : d n u
d C d
I n
d y
= j j e ( a n g
r
p o l A e d l O S Z I - O S T I i n f i a n i s e r I s a q e p u e a e s A r w e u
y e )
i O
S
T
P I
-
e S
e 8
6
I $
P
] 8
6
-
o 0
d 5
8
T 0
S
8
e -
0 2
0
9
|
O D [ ( m u i -
P P s n
M B E L P M O i u ) u s e p
i
q ] e Z u I s e j n p e u
d
e w j e u e
A I O o y y ) e l s a y r y j e a w r y ) ( u r e s
=
O
N 6
0
y O
W
2
1
u y) I Z
E P A v u s s o
f
s s u e
y
o i p u n
y
i n u u r
y
5L O g j U R Y
S
, a y ) ( s u o
1
i u e y
y
n p o y
I n e pd IA t s i
D d 1 ¢ > ) 4 9 9 1 0 I _
u o
w e
u r
L a A L y ( s
e a n
I a u r e
s n yP
n p e N p u e s a t p o q U o u r p e g e
A e s
e A R S1 0I A W e
w j eo
m j e
q u
s u o
n p z 1
u
Ae d O S
E I - O S
Z
2
u
Q ]
M
o
P
7
I
T
S
O
-
4 3 0
)
dA l O S
Z
=I
9 o
4
P
‘
o e
r 6
8
S
-
I
y w t e eI dI ] O S
T
L s s
i ki g 7 i i , b a m a e e n i a
o
MI al g
P
o
$ 8 6 - 0 S 8 m j e q u i n p o y “ ‘ ( @ n j e q u i n p o y
)
r e p u e d r u n y y ( t e p u r s i u n y ) n u r e y y ) n p o s u 2 s 9 n u 1 ( n p o Z u s y o n u 1 ( w a y e s )
a o p
P t s
d ( a
j
a e
T r
‘ w
t
)
9 7
0 |
0
-
d 8
—8 o
is
e
0
S
P
— )
y
e e
2
er
u i
g
N Y N p
r g
)
N p
n g
)
j e
u e
w
y e
s )
e e e G O p e f t a e u s e p o y y ) ( P N e W e I I ( r e 0 y { e u r y n p e u ( r e n o y i n e - n d e y ( w e s r e I e y r e i n p u nn pg e u ( w r ] e s ) j a g n p e u ( w e
e
N
sO
e
e(
*]
¥
* “ b p * ¢
p p
e e e e e u o r p u s o f u y n y j e s t A y
T e s t y
a y ) s e a n i i n
u u r y
j O p a i p u n p y y
a a t y
p u r s n
o
o
y )
y ] ( s u o n s
a s 1 q
o r p u n y y a l y
a y y
a i p u n y e a l
a y y
O
BS
a
a t
E
T -
eO
sS
:Z
|
I
3
A=
6
LO
TS
c
eT
S
eI
T
AO
S
T
sI
a-
S
l8
a6
«
|
(
( 1r
- t ee
P e r r $ 8 6 - 0 5 8 W e ] e u n I t y - n d e ( e s i 2 u 0 y ) ( u r e s U I I N ] I 9 9 O N I T ] I n j e r t e s s y e l e y W I E ] P Z U P L I P A [ ' A o y ) e y j o d u e A e s e a a y I N y I N I I O I I N I L ] s n a s e y o y p n s t ] )
l0
e5
a 8
n-
0
e0
9
|
(
[ p
s u
P A M i s i d a i s ( n p e ( w e i i (
) ] u n a u i n s
T A
T
P I D
=
( s
a
p o y y )
p
e
u u 2 x
A
n
a
e ( u r y ) I n j e n
n
a
e ( u e y )
y
J e y
n
a
e ( u e ] )
P
O
L N
=—9 “
L
8
y
y
e
u
i
s
e
w
l e s t ] = ‘ I s s p e u e n y -4=
nn
r e A l u e y e A e A w e w e s d i u e y y w e ‘ e u e j j e d d e s t a u q J O l s o p e u e n p u e j i d d s e y i e y ; r e A i f u e y e , p u e i s o p e u e n seAilueye,
yi
ei
mn
tu
yu
t
y
y
r
d
e
d
o
j
]
-
y
e
i
i
n
i
)
y
r u
i t
j [
n t a
] I S ¥ H d ( i d d u e p i s e w 1 0 d e A p ) ( s e a p e y ]
N
I P M I p P P L A 2 A N U ] T 3 n J p P l J P A o t A T p o A r n j e w e y e s u e w ( 1 p r o p y e j t a n a t y ) T e I e T j I A n u t y ( r e a e j j a a n a t y ) u a t n ) d r e s p , ( y p e d e s r y o r u t y ‘“ -e w r e s e z e u ( w e y e n n y )
wu
n
se
eA
eg pp
e u
r
n g
y
npeu (tyyedweesi (ry iypon eny ds n tey p s)r e y u o naty) wrejjoy
n
p iesewniny
emmiieyeN
w
mein nding
r
e
y
x
y n (1]>4j>uTUt]) (and2j8ury) s(eArIpDe y)
N
y
(inae(ue]
O l
)
€ l ‘ b l
‘
6 ‘TI ‘Cl
(
a e
O 8 A
H A u o n v e u e s n j o 1 ) r L 2 g s J
A O u c s o f u y e A I s o p e u r n N ] i p e u r e s e q j y e d d e m a n g q e A N I I N U U T Y w e p r y e s n g S U B S I J I I O E } “ I s g p e U E N ] e a n i m n u u t y T I W e I I W D p u n r e p e u e A N I I Q U U I Y e A N I I P U U I Y
O
A S
E
s T
-
o O
S
7
I
=
O
A S
Z
l I
-
e O
S
d T
T
I
(
w
e -
H l O S T ( e p u ( 2 p o y x e d y e d d
P I o r d i
e d - S 8 6 I ] J E A R I I S y r u t s e g ) n p o s q ) y a a d e s e y e y ) - y ) e s e u r e ( w e y - ( a n y e s t A )
I $
P
] 8
6
% -
4 0
4 5
q 8
P 0
5
r 8
-
d 0
0
9
(
( i 1
P a u - n
P P D N A P F = I O O u O n H w u / ) u s a j p s o i y q y ) n I p I e e u s n y y e A v t s u l e e i y n g - u e u k t i e p f e d e p u o y w e | e p u e w e | o O > ( 2 0 0 1 4 9 ) p i e e u i n p u n g — 2 1 0 } e Q u I I O ’ ) ) ( r e A l J M 2 o g u 2 ( 3 o Y 2 7 O y N ) ( 3 0 Y 2 7 O y N ) ~ ( j o 2 7 y Y O N )
~
E L
.
N “ C T 9 ] ‘ L I ‘ $ I ‘ é l
2 9 a
9 2 y
$ ¢ }
)( )
Z J
s J J O 2
I s a p e u e N e a n i i n u u l y e A N I I N U U T Y " O w * ] 3 1 9 8 1 e a A n d i n u u r y 12(‘,oZI w q e r e y r u u n y |
ls
s 1 0 } 9 9 } 0 1 d j d u r a ) j e 2 0 ]
ee
u
a
s
e
y
e
y
y
( P (
u r e q u i e j o m y n s t
|
W q u i e j o y y n a t | (and i m y j e A e a r s i e u n y a n j e A e a e s e u r n y ) — I p n y y A o s u r j ] - e ( e y j o j o y w e y
I w
- p n u e s e q u y ) ( w e s Y e w U P A R I I ) - I p 2 a m n j e d A p
w (
S U I P I B A S T ] R A T U T A U e l e s e l e y w r e u e j j e d d w r e s e a s t y e a n u i y )
p o a i n j e o e l e
s
e ] e s u e w r e y e s u e w 1 A 2 p e u t s a ¢ )
weiiny
npeu
mutes] mAtein n p e u t i ( 1 j 2 a j o u n a n p e u t i ( 1 j 2 a j o u n n p e u i i ( 1 ] 2 a y o u T u
(snae(uey)
(yyen
y
dest
y )
ryonty) n
y
a
7t )
n t
)
‘02 a 4 te te “7
A
e
y
e
8 u
y 8 e
A
s
u
C J u U v A I z I Y u o 1 l j y v U L L o f u 0 8 8 S 8 ‘ T e A N I I N U U T Y ‘ o s e 1 N y y e y p e u o n u e A p u- ue tg o nJ od r da sy 3 A i n j u a > T e A N I I N U U I Y j y o d e u s e y q Wus - I e y jo a d y e ipusley
4 9 4 1
Z I J
a y u r
d A u2
l s u
Q ]
‘[o
e
d
&
edry
S U Y
O 0}
- wend
T
E
S
di O
ef
P
T
T
S
O
-
I
C
l S
Ad O
o
P
y
n
P O M t y O S T I - S 8
6
eurd - e P s Z e U - P u e U e u I d e I e d P l e s t l A i r A I ) n je s ¥I H] d d e r e y y a s e d
i
I p s a m n j e d ‘ W e y e s u e W i n a r y ( t u n d e a t s ) weSueseansty
i
wey]
A,
8 (ureuedes (weZuesus)
5
0
-
d 6
ei T $ 8
r
P
9
0
0
-
g 8
e 5
|l 0
e
P
P A I U O D [ ¥ 7 1 4 0 1 S 1 F ] y u p a p o y y y ) ( 1 7 1 4 3 5 1 q nyyoddnizeneny E Z U I S E [E Ej IEZAy ] - e w e y ) ( w e i n d e u j e u ( 1 j e
O u
s
u n
d
e s
®T
LA P
I
n
p
e p
e
u
r
y
o n
A
9
G
N = )( 1]24younuy
E
I A
a
t
y )
O “Sz 9 7
“
“
L
Z
,
1 e j e a n y j o s e A r l u e y e , a - A B I M O S [ e ) [ 1 ] o d e A r y B(2u1t3 uU99 s e j o y y i e y ‘ [ i j o d e d r y ( S I 2 A b I M ) e A t s a g H a u e s n a D - U s u I p e g ‘ n p e u w e u e j j e g m u n y q u d ] j o s e A i f u e y e , ( e y u e u y s ) r e B u e p u ( s i 2 a v a m ) s e a r Z o A y
(
( w e s n d i a a r y ) ‘ r e 8 e ] ] O y - e u r A n y q u y l a g p e u I p 2 a m n g j e d w e y e s u e w
(
s u e s n i n u n t y i p u n d - N u e s e y x y x e D - e d e A e l i , “ i n p w e u e i ) “ B I E P ; " O ) ( a n y j e w - e u u e y y r u r y - r u t y w ) e n d w e i n d e u u e y y
1
3
2
/
1
0
)
-
u e
l j ( a
n p e u u e , ( 2 z 0 9 e q u i 1 0 D ) n p e u I p e d ( 2 2 0 9 e q u t t 0 ) e i e s i s e d e p e a n p e u ( 2 1 0 1 e q u i 1 0 5 ) T e P E U r T L A N P E N n p e s u n u T e g ( Q o s r y Y O N ) N p e u j e s r u e p ] e a e y y r u e w e s s n a r ( u e y ) n p e u
m
8 7 " 6 2 ‘ 0 ¢ ‘ T e 4 :
(wieyeZus,)
(1jyedesrryut
y)
q g
y t
n a
d s
y d e
i
a i t i n e u o n v u s s o f
u
e a n i i n u u t y T a w e s te D A u a g
e u p
u e y e a n i i n u u l r y n p e d u o y
e
j e
-
u
U s u I p e g
j 1 w
n y q p u r e J e a n i i n u u r
y
s e u e j i e d
d
1 e S
uge6p r
T p j
S
7 n n
O
e -
T
E_
A
O
S
y
y r
r a
A L P O S Z I= - O S T T I e x y r e p r a n y r e p t a n u t y ) r q u y - i y q u y ) - e Z u e w e l i o y - P 1 J O Y ) ( w e j e s u e w a y e s sie ¢r e - - n d e y j e u n y i ( 2 n a a e } i 9 ) w e j n y x u a ,
I
' m
1
> (
] s
6 (
1
W e
y
w
e
8
S
-
I
T
H S
sL O
O
P
8
d 5
0
n -
6
r 8
$
9
0
0
-
" 8
o
r
{ 0
5
y
p e
l
) e )
t
y
e
s)
t
y
P i r y o n u e a r i S E t y o n a
R u e s r j O e s
P A U O D P i u / ) u s a p o y ) ) ( i n q u i n i n y n p e u ( s n a r ( u e ] ) w e i n y ( 1 1 y e d W e U l I n y I E J E X E P E A n p e u ( H n y e s s n~ p) e u ( 1 y y e d e s u s ,n p e u
. y s p
2Y LA T
O
J
E
J e
e
9
I
P
a
e
¢ ¢ v e C e 9 ¢ V I
E
‘ ‘ “ “
)
y
y eAlag
A a a ] e A e S I A U d U I p e g - u e Z e W ) s ] j o 3 B u r U M O } [ P I S e O D * ( T e U T e A p I e u U A r S E I A E A 8 a ] J y s o ) y u e y s i o w B u r h a r ] s a r U N O S s } ] O u ( 1 e w u e s e i s o p e u e n y Haw n e p s e n u a ic Z u r u m r e s j — r f o d e d r y - U R T E A I Y ) J O J s a p n y 1 e d u e p y p u e t e s
-
- d e d u e i n j e s ‘ w e u e j j e d e u r A e s e u r l e y w e u e j j e d ( s t a p e s ) s e r e m A r e y - L i e s a y e l e y
m
( s n d t e y ) A e a e y e q ) ( u r e u r n e g
-
- e A e l W t e A y ) ] ( w e j e s u e w r e s e y u r y ( 1 e s e y u > ] )
y e
y Z
e u
u e
w
e
d
e
l
t
,
Ul
ul WeOeYjyo oepuoyuede/ w
e
Npeu ( 2 1
0
n p e u ( e 1
0
i i n y
(
(andapaury) uNmyu y wey ( e n p d u a e [ w 3 u 1 e q u i t 0 5 ) ry5) n d d n i n y 1 e q u s t 0 5 ) i m u e z e g r e m p e y )
S 6 ‘OP ‘Tt
‘e E E
)
y
4 2 4 1 Q j u v a g a y Z I _ u o u v u L s o f u y e e s e A ijfou e j e a - l u u s ] e 8 u e y W] G ) ( e y u U r T ] n d d e u e j i e d d e s t a i g e w a 3 e sJ so e d — t j e a l e
p
( { 2 9 n 0 : y n s t y W W I e A a g n p e u p u e J U R Y I Z ] J I 4‘ )s a I p o q 2 9 U 3 1 3 0 } j 2 y 4 A T U Y w e s e ss ee ue e w e I e Y Y a s e [ n y W e U eu j l j e g e Z u r s e j e s s yn p e u r j e a
p o u aA g O S E I - O S es a q e A t i t g r i i e g- n i y ) ( 1 e } j 0 4 y 4 a t e p y - n a r y ) s e p u e s e 3 0 4 - u n p o y x e i u n y ( 1 =e y e u U e
A
I
e
u
i
e
1
3 w
I e (
T
S
O
-
I
=Z
aA
dl
O
S
v
o
p
e
6
8
S
-
I
aI
gI ]
O
S
T
s
t
o
p
8
5
0
-
g 6
a]8
s[§
w
o
p
9
0
0 ) )
- y y
p o ]u a g 0 5 8 ) e u e w r y e u e u r
Y j j
E y y
W e e
P A U O D j y n 4 o i t F ] u f ) s a p o y y ) ( i 7 1 j 1 q e e e P B U I S EE IT EE AI Z Y - e y J e U P e r n d l y n p e u ( w e s m d C a O e r a u ( w e i n d
LA P I Q u e E p e u ( w r n i l e e n p e
TF e n
G e
F
A I
O
N =
“ Z p “ ¢ p V P
e r
“ueg ,
Apurol
s n
j u v a z r y 4 9 4 1 0 u o r j p u s o f u y s ] J O ] ‘ s e A N u i N u u l y A ( = t q e J u ps | t o e a 2 u uey e ejI d eO e a y e y p ) e ‘ w e u u e a n ( u y w p u e w e w e s i u e y y i j e s e p u e g e j u e w e s U O s o x e ) B U I A A 2 | sanii p n 3 e d d e u e i i e g pow a y ) j o a i e y s ) ru0 A q p a t a a y ( e u e i e d s ‘ e A B S I A Q I a u ) p e u p u e w e s e s e u
A P o l l a g O S E I - O S Z I - (1eyeurnty) - U e j ] ) I p u o ] ( w e s m d e u e i e p w e ( u l a r ] - e u e l e y s e r i e - e j j e d e u r d e s w r e u - u e A I Y s t y ) ( w e p
=
O
=S
AZ
I
P-
oO
l lS
aT
dI
IO
IS
] T
p1
o-
uS
a8
d6
I5
]
p
8
6
o-
t0
a5
g8
|0
5
p8
o-
u0
a0
g9
(
- w w
( e r e
[ p 0 1 P I O n u p i u a j s i q ] u s a p o y y ) e A r j e y E P P y y e n u p e e w e y ) ( w r e i n e i i n y n u n a n y , i n d e y j e u e w e y ) ( y o d r y Y y I N O S )
Au d
=
° N “ S b “ 9 p ‘LY
)
(
e
t e
W u e s( es ] y] O 3 )
T e u I y } u p o u
s iA sq s e a s - J 3 2 w W
( 1 u e d e u e y i t y ) j u r y
s 2 1 p o g
r e
w u e s e p y ( s ] ] 0 3
I
)
]
A
J
q
e A e s I e W e Y a ] d o a J dO
g y
I p
S
s
u
a
O
r
I Z
n
a
j
I
e d p u e 6 /
s n p e u
w e y e s u e u w N I T ] j e u - e w e y ) ( 1 ] J e A e s e s
i p n 3 e d d e u e j
i e g
( n i e d j i s p o a t y s y y ) A q
Y a u r
e m D
‘ J e y e u e A L 2 g Z e n ]
3 1 e I 3 e 1J O
- e J e p U N S
w
e s n d e j o > - e p u n s )
‘ ( W e s
“ T E [ E W e
W E N
w e i n d e j
o s e
w
p u e
i n j e q u i n
p o y
w e w e s s u e y l
N I I e 3 e s e i y e I n y j
L
)
y
i
a
o
n
yy
nr
is
D e
l
e d
e
O wj
M y
P I
u
n p e ( 1 0 3 e ( A )
W( w
e l i n y ( 1 1 ] e d
A I G PT LA
u
E Y
1
Y I N O S )
I
I n e i Q ,
e s
r y s n s i y )
b
6
“ “
8 O
b S
4 s Y r J O ‘ L L
a ]
A q i p n 3 e d d e u r i i e g 2 p u t e w e m - n i y g u e s e a n y ) s a j i u p e ( o y 1 g > 9 9 1 4 1 e y r u Z e u u I r p - Y e u y l N y n W W O ) o j e e i s J d a o s a o a n s t i n j j e u ( i n u e W ) [ H o d e d r y = - n i u e u n y ) ( n i e d p u e 1 y 8 r y a y a ‘ a ' t ) r e u a s e y e r y e y S u e p
p
y
u e
r e B u e y e
a
( p u e p z = y r e y ‘ a r y y = n i l i n y g p ) s
a
u e u s
s j i o e w
s y s t y r o i 0 s } s a j a r A e r s i p e s e p u e e y g u e
W
e S
‘
,
s a t N j U a
>
‘ € ‘ O U ‘T]I]
F I Q e
] p u e Z
‘ 6 b ‘ 8 b ‘ L b ‘ Z h ‘ 6 € ‘ b Z ‘ Z Z ‘ 1 Z ‘ Z T ‘ S S O U
‘ A Y I
Q R ] F a s
d ‘ “
a y w
o s y
w e d e
y e
n a p e
w s y
s e s
“ A
Y U T U
- Y I Y s
a
I
y
a
)
o u { |
a j q e y
a e s
‘ 2 a N
Q a N I e
J 1 9 M
S U O T
E Z I
yw N U
r
a
e W
o
L
d
e
R
Z
I
ve y s O
e o i p u o l O}
s
j O D a y a j o ‘ M p V 6 U / U M O U X
u
t a m S a T P O d J 2 Y I O P U
P
w a a s
e U a s E
Y y e
B u r m
p s y )
&
J O S U
O I Z 2
Q
I
T
o n e z i
u r s
J
I O
J U P Y I
I O U T
a I 4 y
S 2 t p
O g J U
P Y I
S
m s u r n s e y p n y p e u ( y j y e d e s r y o n a t y ) I p N n y p » e y U e j e y ( t j 2 a q o u r u t y ) - e j e a e u n s e y u r y ( t j 2 a j a u n T p u e t u y ) I
W
e
,
y M I U N P W , I ) z y ]
s e m
a i a y p “ ( s a t u p T y u r }
2 4 )
J O U O N E Z I U R B Z Y I ] O P e p a a s d L
U R Y
I a e W — W e U U R A n I U Y ‘ s a n i p o u r u s o >
m M
s a x a j d w i o d u e q i n 1 0 J
I E W
s 1 9 4 M s u m D I V E V U 1 0 4 " € 8 P u r 7 8 “ 1 8 ‘ 0 8
T
‘ “ 7 S “ ¢ ¢ | 7 t t p b
y
u
yf g
4 2 4 1 0 j u v a a
r
S Z I _
u o n v u s
o
w e i e sp eu eu r w ;
y o d u t
p o w‘ s| g A p u a n b a s q
n
w r e i e s e n p y u e “ q n s
A r e
r p t s 0 d 2 2 8 )
2 1 9 2
1‘ A y ‘ o u ( Z
e A
p u e gy s 0 d o j d n
1 6
“ A I n j u r >1 9 3B k ]
e j o y
‘ y o d s e my t eB
W a r e s
O A T S , ( 1 e ] e s e wy Po {sVy)
y e y
j o s p o t i a d
P o
H e d A) I
O 4 a
-
I
E
r O S
uA
o
P
.
I
I
S
O
-
=I
Z
S
AgO
a
u
p
o
e
:
O 6
8
5—
- ~
Is
4 ) Ig ] S
Ts
r aIO
a u
o
i p
a
l
i 7
i e
a m
s 8
: 5
s
n
’
Ia
g
6
-
0
Is8
t
p o w
e
eY
w
R
y
y p
e y
9 n d n p e
0 i r
- 0 e V p o
g8 w A e
p o
[u s 0 5
y l
o y
A
S E I
T E -
e A
e u
e j
o iy nu yp = y) ( p u i =s i ] o y 8 u r y D ) ‘ T e l e s E I E A m r y ) a n y
p o o u u s a p o y y ) y n p e uu l y w e n ( a n d a j n p e uu l e s a _ - B P E U G p s p u
u u r n y a r
Q m m p
P e
N
O
* | ‘ 7
npeuos
uo “12 pue ZuuNjejnueU
-
- 2 1 d w o y o d e j o p I a d n g ‘ e s u e N s I I Y y s p o p e s A q u r w e u n i e d d e s z e y y a u ) t y i A i n j u s > ‘ q n g “ ( I I 1 P o u e d ) w o s y o d A r e r p t s i Fo }d ‘ Z u u o n n y [ ( e e 2 e I l 3 p s s N y S w s O e j I O o u De ( e y A j > r 0 rN( j > eepy u ) [ep N e eu4 0 y [ 9 U 3 y P y M I J O ) S} B O7 p[uuem}eos }e j 0 e > s 213U29
w(
ew
ur
a r y w e j e g w w e u e j i e j j e d m e u e y y e s e y
r e 8 e u - u n d d
u a
u n i e d - ur e u r j j e d
lepu ( e t A e e pu p e I p A e N a I n T a ] i y)
u e a r y y e - e i j e g
e u e g
( n y e p a
1 4 q y )
n g w e r n d ( w g y )
y d
s e u a
a
e
r
y
)
‘
e
)
y
I M
p Y V n p e
u
( a n a e
( u e
n p e u
m a n p e g
( a n d a
j s u r y d )
n p e u
e u r i e g
( 3 o 2 1 y
Y I N O S )
u l
n p e u
e u e n e d
n p e u
e u h C O
( j 0 2 1 y
Y I n o s )
Z
4 9 4 1 0 ) T u D a a I Y u o r j p u s o f u y ] e 3 S e O 7 U M O } p u r e y e s
:
Z u l N j o e j N u e U 2 1 3 U 2 9 u l e y y e j o y u o d [ e } s e O D U M O } p u r e j e s u i m N y d e j n u e w 2 4 3 U 3 9 [ E } S E O D U M O }
O
F A N S E
a I
-
O S p n r f ‘
Z
I
|
=
F O S
A Z
I
a -
a
a
O S
T
2 : " a
I
|
e _
| a a a A O S T I - S 8 6 p e y e [ n y e y e d i y e y y w i r e j e s a d w e i n d e y s y p y ) J e s u I N ] J e N ( w r e u e u r n i e g I ] J e A e T N y e j O 7 > w e u e j e d ( u r e u n j i e d d e 3 e n y ) ‘ r e i n i i y y - u s l e y w r e j e r s d d e j o s e s p ( i p e A r e y ] y ) e p u o y l e u u E y y w e u r j j e d e j o o ( I n a r a n i e y x y n U I 1 ] )
| 5
8
a 6
-
e 0
g 5
s 8
|
e 0
5
8
e -
0
0
9
|
D
O U
“ l (
A I 9 ® LT I A P A P I D [ P O I N T ) u s a p o y y ) i u j s q ] m m A r e u u e , n p e u u l e f e r t y u p e l e y e j e a n p e u ( a n a e l u e y ) e u r N e g w e i i n y u l e y y i u e w e s s y e j e A n p e u
(
i n q u i n i n y n p e u ( i n a e ( u e y ) I e A M I ] N p e U U I e j e a e l e s t y p e l e y ( m m a r ( u e y ) n p e u
O s
N “ / “ g n a
e
(
6 “ O
]
u
e
]
)
E P ‘ s u e p M
U M O } [ P I S P O 7 ) [ P I S P O 7 )U M O } )
O[
( ¢ 4 n G i u r J [UBMISO(E}uO rT)e uejj R A A ) P e m e R i a N eg) o n d i w o e s d u u t e s 0 } 2 9 U 2 O J S 2 T J Y 2 1 u o y u e i n d e u e d j e y u l w e u r } j e e j g o o u l N p e I u n j j e u r y s f ) N p e u e j e q u i r ) ( { w e u j e d e u r y
PS
IT
SYE)O/7
U)
M
O
}
)
‘ w e j e w o y w e u e i j e g ( w i e j e a o y ) w e u e i e g s e g ( t s e d ) f e u e q u e s s i n w e u e i j e g u e | ( 2 2 0 ] e p p n D ) - P I p U L A P A T U I | - t u t y ) w e n d ( u r e s n d i p u d a e Z u n y o N y u r j o > ( 2 ) w e u e i j e g
w ‘ B
e w j
j P e u O d e
a e I
o y j I A
y e ,
g
(
w u
u l e i r e
N p m e a u n p e g w e j m j u o y y ( a n d a j u r y D ) i n y n i n u n y s n d e y j e u e w e y ) n p e u E x i 2 W Q j o o r y Y y a n o s ) e x n p e u ( Q j o a r y y n o s )
S
T
n p e u F j e q u i ) ( s n a e ( u e y )
r ‘el ‘bl
Tl a
i
‘Mvsvsvu
&
YM
31{UID
ZUIINIDEJNULW
}]ES
PUL
UMO)
[e}SeOD
EB JOJ 9 ‘OU “AJ IGE]
22$
y
u
Y o f
e s
l e d A t A G O 1 e a O S E T - O S Z I u o u v u s [ P } S E O T ) U M O } e p u r j e U e j o ] 7 P) } S E O UD M O } - d n p n g ) e u e j i e d i p e d u [ e 2 y } U u S M e E O p O } D e s B I E Y Y I s e [ N y e j j e d i p e d w e s u e s e ] y ) ( s e q o n b u e s y U [ j P M e I O A S } e E y O ) D ) e u e i i e g
B O
T I . i n y
y e u ( u r
e r e
w e u
[ e A
e y ( w
- O
S
e g j j e
d s
1 0
I j) e
P o d A L O S
C
B j O D w e u e
}
w e s I p
y
( u r e
u
A
I I :
e
6
8
S
-
I
e d L i p O S
T
l
e
P
F
8
S
0
-
d 6
8
ea $
r
p
s
s
9
d 0
0
e -
r 8
e 5
f 0
z
]
A 9 8 1I L A P I “ O D P I O [ P 4 0 1 1 ] I u ) u s a p o y y ) ( 7 u u I s
1
q
- ( a n a e l u e y ) I N n p u o N| p F e uul m u y W e }U jI o y e p u e o j y o u d e d e ( e y e p u e w i n d a y 8 u r y ) i n q n p u e i u n i n y ( s n a e ( u e y ) n e p p e n u y ( 1 j 2 4 j o u r u t y
)
N w(
O 9 ] “ Z | ‘ g ] 6 ]
E
S
y S
2 O
SE u P o T rp usso s f e uy I LxeIEY w u r y ( u e s t u e ) s a t j T U N U T U I O D U r a l B 2 ; 1 a u d q u s I I
j
s u o n d u d s u r w o J j n s e y i n f u e g M P I E P O 0 } W , W U E Y U O T E I
D
s e 8 a q t a u d ] ] e ) U l 3 u 0 y ( u o r Z 2 1
G10 ewornuy e j e “ s 2 ‘ m a E j E n
r
u )
u
t
p
4
0 a
y
)
,
Arr OS a E s I- OSZ7I j j 2
o
p
" n
(
-
=
l
ea
e b Al OSZI-OST-Td oyursepry
p
e poled tijeddru
e, (re(ung)
©
S e
S Tt OSTI-S86
Por
m
P u
y
T
e
a
i $86-058
se
De
cae
;
a
= |
cm0eS8 -009
|
)
D
O
t
i
(imix Q u
] y "wu) npeu n p u n g n p e u ( 2 x 2 0 e q
4 usapoy) i
0 e
i r
H
] my
F
I
O
(‘-sueneuaTpeu (luye y)
|
Z
= — “
°
N
a
(
j
u
a e r a T O u o n v u o f u y d i e s y o y s u e t w e n J U S U I Z I I Z Y “ s u O T ) - j e q u i r y [ | 3 u o w e I E T J O Y W I J o s e e j o a 4 s e > ( s u e s t q s e ) e v i v S v u ) n p e u I n j y 0 } 2 0 U 2 1 2 j 2 y s u e s t u y
O
A e r S E —
i e
d
I - O
S Z I n j
( 2 )
( n p e u _
_ ( J
N I p O N
=
q ) )
O
A S
l
Z
T
P
o -
v O
e S
d T
T
T O
l S
T
P I
-
e $
d 8 6 ‘
S
A
T
T
U
N
U
I
W
O
i 5 D
P
f 8
6 - U
e 0 L
d 5 S " S
8
S S S
I
Y
U
E
S I Y I
I E
M
J
M O J
[ P e a 0 5 8 - 0 S S S v s v F y U u 2 1 } U I D
y 0 9 0 — 0 1 0 } J a B N
— E y
j
o r t t r
N
,
n a q i u / )
( m
i w s a p o
y )
n e p a e j u e
p e n N y
( u r
a y e s )
n p
e u 1 I Z u 2 D
[ r y
( s n a e (
u e ] )
q
0
M w S
o S — _ — _ a > "
= o ™ -
—
p
P U R
[ Z S O U ‘ A l
2 1 9 2 1
a l
J O J
C S ] “ O U ‘ [ A
P I G ]
PTPIAI4LF#A®0 LD “ F — 6 2 2 7 9
€ S S
5
The South Indian Guilds: Their Role in
Early Medieval Trade and Urbanization
()= of the more important but less understood areas of
economic activity in medieval South India is that of the
corporate trading communities often called ‘guilds’. The term
‘guild’ immediately conjures up the image of an association of
professionals with a well defined structure, a carefully framed
code of conduct of rules and membership governed by certain
regulations and qualifications. It is hard to get indisputable
evidence of such an organization from the South Indian records,
although the term Bananju dharma is the nearest to a code of
rules that existed and was adhered to by the itinerant merchant
bodies. Hence, it is rather a matter of convenience that the term
‘guild’ has been used to denote these merchant bodies, and
hardly any parallel to the European merchant guilds, or the
Hang of China in Sung and Yuan times, or the Karim: of Egypt,
is meant.' It would perhaps be more appropriate to use the term
organization/association which is the nearest equivalent to the
term Samaya(m) used in their inscriptions.
A second important aspect of the problem is the nature of
the organization and its membership. Names of several groups
occur in the epigraphic records all over South India and it is
not always easy to identify them and determine their relationship
to one another. To illustrate the point, one notices conspicuous
references to the Ayydavole or Ainnurruvar, Valanjiyar, Nanadesi
and Nagarattar, apart from various other groups like the Manr-
gramam and Anjuvannam, in the records ranging from the eighth
to the seventeenth centuries AD—more specifically between the
eighth and fourteenth centuries, both in South India and Sri
Lanka. With the exception of Nagarattar, all these terms refer to
itinerant merchant bodies. While the Ai#narruvar, or the Five
Hundred, figure prominently in most of them, some 46 different
groups are noticed in association with them at various centres
512 y Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
and in different contexts. Listing all these groups, K. Indrapala
expresses the difficulties in determining the nature of their
relationship with the Five Hundred, and dismisses as untenable
the views that the Five Hundred was a federation of all these
bodies, or that the latter were sub-divisions of the Five Hundred.”
Some of these groups were non-mercantile in character, as they
refer to occupational groups like the Parcalas, Kumbhalikas etc.,’
and to groups of fighters taken to be mercenaries accompanying
the Five Hundred.’
From the late twelfth to the fourteenth centuries, there is yet
another major organization called Cittirameli Pertya Nadu, or
the Padinenbhumi or Visaya of the Seventy Nine Nadus, appearing
jointly with the Five Hundred in a position of prime importance
in the prasastis of the inscriptions recording joint donations of
tolls and cesses on merchandise. The pride of place is here given
to the Cittirameli, and the Five Hundred a secondary position,
with their respective emblems, viz. the Sengol and méli: (the staff
and the plough) of the first, and the pasumpai (money bag) of
the second.® There can hardly be any doubt as to the commercial
and urban context in which these joint donations occur. This
is to be seen as a result of the revival of long-distance trade in
South India in the tenth century ap, which was itself a part of
the increase in South Asian trade involving such distant regions
as Egypt and West Asia, and Southeast Asia and China.
The whole corpus of information of South Indian trade at
this time centres mainly round the Five Hundred, and to a
lesser extent, on the Manigramam and Avjuvannam and other
such organizations. It would, therefore, be appropriate to start
from the Five Hundred and proceed to enquire into the nature
of their organization and relationship with other bodies. Only
then can the complexity of inscripticnal data be converted
into useful categories of evidence. For reasons which would
become apparent in the course of this essay, it would also be
useful to distinguish between the Five Hundred on the one
hand, and the Manigramam, Anjuvannam and the Nagaram on
the other. The Five Hundred was a large organization of
itinerant merchants, of a supra-regional character,’ the Mani-
gramam a localized merchant body operating within specific
regions, as their designations like Uraiyar Manigramam and
The South Indian Guilds / 5135
Kodumbalur Manigramam' would show, although they had inter-
regional and long-distance trade links, and interacted with the
Five Hundred or the moving trade carried on by the Five
Hundred in their regions. The Avjuvannam refers to an or-
ganization of foreigners who seem to have begun their com-
mercial activities on the west coast, particularly Kerala, in the
eighth and ninth centuries’ and spread out to the other coastal
areas of South India from the eleventh century AD, interacting
with both local merchants and the Five Hundred."® Initially,
Anjuvannam seems to have referred to Jewish traders who came
to the west coast and acquired settlements. Later, however, it
was also used for Arab Muslim traders."
The Nagaram is a much more specific organization of mer-
chants found in every market centre, collection and distribution
centre, where local trade and itinerant trade met and exchanged
items of trade.'? The designations of these bodies remain the same
throughout the period of their activity. Nagaram being a mercan-
tile organization evolving from local groups organizing and con-
trolling local trade, Nagarattar became a generic term for all the
traders and the trading community, particularly in Tamil Nadu,
and hence is used even today by the Nattukkottai Chettiars.”*
The Five Hundred, as an organization of merchants, originated
in the eighth century aD in Aihole in the Hungund Taluk of the
Bijapur district of Karnataka.'* The founding of the Ayyavole Five
Hundred may be seen as the result of a decision of a group of
Mahajanas or brabmanas (caturvedis), also called the Five Hundred
Svamis of the Mahdgrahara of Aihole, to institutionalize control
of the existing commerce of that region, thus providing an inst-
tutional base for organized commerce.'® Hence, it would be erron-
eous to trace the origin of the itinerant merchant organization,
as Kenneth R. Hall has done, to small groups of expeditionary
merchants who serviced less wealthy or isolated communities of
the hinterland, and found it profitable to band together for mu-
tual protection, and to assume that the itinerant merchant organ-
izations of the Cola age developed from such bands of expedi-
tionary traders into quite powerful commercial associations.’°
Aihole, also known as Aryapura and Ahicchatra in their inscrip-
tions, was, thus, both the progenitor and birth place oft he corpo-
ration. However, the organization did not remain a single unified
514 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
body throughout its history, nor was Aihole its permanent head-
quarters. The number Five Hundred was a conventional one and
remained so for the rest of the history of the itinerant traders,
who derived their name from the parent organization, despite the
fact that the organization became a much larger one, drawing its
members from various regions and communities. Other terms
like Nanadesi, Ubhaya-nanadesi, Valanjtyar or Vira Valanjiyar,
Banajiga etc., were of a descriptive or adjectival nature, used to
denote the itinerant merchants following the trading profession
or the Bananju dharma. Hence, these terms are found sometimes
used interchangeably in many of their records. Among the other
groups who are mentioned along with the Five Hundred, were
mercenary fighters who protected their merchandise, probably in
lieu of a share in the profit. The militant character of their mercan-
tile organization derives mainly from these groups, whose personal
valour and ferocity are indicated by such epithets as Ilancingam,
Cittiravali, Erivirar, Munaivirar, Kongavalar, Virakkotiyar etc. The
militant component of the itinerant trading organization is visible
in many of the South Indian epigraphs, but most conspicuously
in the Kongu xddux inscriptions, where the sculptural represent-
ations of weapons, horses and elephants accompany some of the
records mentioning attikosattar (elephant corps) and Virakosattar
(cavalry).'” Some of them became traders through long association
with the organization. Crafts groups are also sometimes men-
tioned with the Five Hundred,'® probably due to the links estab-
lished between the two for the marketing of commodities, parti-
cularly textiles, metalware and pottery. Being the largest itinerant
merchant organization covering distant regions and divergent
commercial areas, the Five Hundred was the only organization to
have mercenaries to protect their goods and to set up protected
mercantile towns (with warehouses) called Erivirappattanas.”®
The name Ayyavole,” became, in Tamil, Aiyapolil and Danma-
polil, and was often used as a descriptive epithet of their towns
and the deities they worshipped, e.g. Atyapolil ParameSvari. But
the term Five Hundred is more commonly used to denote the
group, and Is sometimes stretched into Nanadesiya Tisai Ayirattu
Ainnurruvar.
% Meani>n g—The F—i* ve Hundred of at housand directions and several countries/
regions.
The South Indian Guilds / 315
It has been pointed out earlier that the Five Hundred
cannot be treated as a single unified body of merchants
throughout its history, nor did it function as one cohesive
whole. In the very early days of the organization, there
seems to have been some unity and common purpose in
the manner in which they functioned, both in Karnataka
and in Tamil Nadu. But with the growing development of
regional kingdoms and regional interests, there appears a
bifurcation between the guild as it operated in the Kannada
speaking areas, and as it functioned in the Tamil region.”!
Within these broad divisions the association appears to have
functioned at times in large units.
In Karnataka, from the eleventh century onwards, the
Ayyavole acquired new bases and established several towns
as ‘Southern Ayyavole’, both under the patronage of the
Western Calukyas of Kalyani and the Hoysalas of Dvara-
samudra. Interestingly, in an inscription of aD 1267 from
Dodballapur, the Ayyavole merchants claim descent from
the Colas and Calukyas.” The ‘Southern Ayyavole’ towns
are believed to be named after the Ayyavole in northern
Karnataka.2 However, most of these towns came up in South
Karnataka only after regular interaction between Karnataka
and Tamil Nadu was established following Cola inroads and
a possible movement of the Tamil merchant organization
into the link areas and Karnataka. It would, hence, be
tempting to see a connection and argue that these towns
represent an expansion of the Tamil Five Hundred into
Karnataka.
In Tamil Nadu the Aififidrruvar (Five Hundred) acquired the
character of a composite body of itinerant traders who came
from different parts of the Tamil speaking areas. One of the
most remarkable inscriptions, from the point of view of its
composition, comes from Tirumalai in the Sivaganga taluk of
Ramanathapuram district. After the usual prasasti, it provides a
list of the people who belonged the organization and who met
at Tirumalai in the Aifffarruvar Tirukkavanam of the local Siva
temple. The members hailed from different places and are called
by their respective regions, like the Tisai Ayirattu Aifftrruvar
316 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
of Vadakalavali nadu, of Tirukottiyar Maniyambalam, of Vem-
barrar, of Malaimandalam, of Alagaimanagaram, and many
other places.4 Terms like Aifitrruva Bhattan and names like
Aifinurruvan Inban Devan Cetti would also indicate the hetero-
geneous caste composition of this body. The Five Hundred was,
thus, a group of people of ‘disparate origins associating together
for a common purpose’ (trade), 1.e. of several castes, religions
and regions.”°
The first appearance of the Five Hundred in Tamil Nadu is
in the Pudukkottai region towards the close of the ninth century,
and their presence here and in the Ramanathapuram district is
almost continuously attested to down to the fourteenth century
AD. Their sudden appearance in the distant Tamil region of
Pudukkottai, after Aihole, may be attributed to the established
commercial importance of this region from the beginning of
the Christian era, and also to the link that this region provided
between the trading emporium of Tondi with the Kaveri Valley
and the Vaigai region, the Cola and Pandya heartlands respec-
tively.”° There is, indeed, a concentration of the ‘Five Hundred’
inscriptions in the Pudukkottai and Ramanathapuram districts
throughout the period under consideration. In this region, the
Five Hundred appears to have interacted with the Kodumbalur
Manigramam and the local Nagarattar, some of whom may well
have become local representatives of the itinerant merchant
organization.
The route that the Five Hundred used to reach Tamil Nadu
so early (ninth century—Munisandai) after its foundation in
Athole in Karnataka, is not clearly attested to. It has, however,
been suggested”” that they moved into Tamil Nadu through the
Chittoor region and Palar valley southwards, a route that was
probably used by the Kurumbar tribes, who are still to be seen
in the Pudukkottai area. This was the route followed by the
invading Rastrakuta armies under Krsna III in the tenth century
AD. Equal claims to have been the regular route of migration
or movement between Karnataka and Tamil Nadu may be made
for the Kongu region, i.e. from the Ganga country north of the
Kaveri through Kongu into the Kaveri valley and further south.
This route is better attested to from very early times through
the line of Tamil Brahmi inscriptions (Pugaliyur, Arachalir,
The South Indian Guilds / 317
Tiruchirapalli and Sittannavasal) and the discovery of hoards
of Roman coins also marking the same route, apart from the
tradition of the Digambara Jaina Migration.** However, in both
these areas, i.e. Palar Valley and Kongu, the inscriptions of the
Aiffurruvar appear only from the eleventh century ab. A second
wave of Jaina influence in the eighth and ninth centuries, under
Rastrakuta patronage, is also indicated by a series of Jaina
epigraphs, marking a line of sites in the North Arcot, South
Arcot, Tiruchirapalli, Pudukkottai, Ramanathapuram, Madurai
and Tirunelveli, leading on to South Kerala.” These migrations
may well have followed ancient and early medieval trade routes
linking the different cultural regions of South India.
The spatial and chronological distribution of the Ainfurruvar
inscriptions also makes an interesting study. In the Pudukkottai
region, their activities in the ninth to eleventh centuries AD’?
were encouraged by the early and middle Colas and their
feudatories, the Irukkuvéls of Kodumbaltr. The close matri-
monial ties between the Colas and Irukkuvéls may well have
been inspired by the strategic location of the region, linking
areas of commercial importance. A rather close identity of
interests between this commercial organization and the Colas
may be recognised, not only in the fostering of trade in this
region, but also in other regions conquered by the Colas in the
eleventh and twelfth centuries AD.
The Five Hundred moved in wherever the Colas stepped in
as conquerors. Into the region south and north of the upper
Kaveri valley, i.e. the Kongu and Ganga countries respectively,
the Aifftrruvar moved in the wake of the Cola conquests
under Rajaraja I and Rajendra I (ap 985-1044). Talakkadu,
north of the Kaveri, and Mudikondan (Mudikonda-colapuram),
south of the Kaveri, marked the two’major centres of merchant
activity?! In Mudikondan, the merchants of the 18 pattanas
north of the Kaveri and of the 18 pattanas south of the Kaveri
made huge endowments to the local Visnu temple and exercised
control over the temple management.” In the eleventh century,
Aiyapolil Kattar and Basinikonda (Siravalli) in the Chingleput
and Chittoor districts, respectively became Ertvirappattanas or
protected mercantile towns under special charters from the
Cola rulers for the Tondaimandalam region, also called
518 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Jayankondacélamandalam.” In Sri Lanka, following the Cola
conquests of the eleventh century ap, the Five Hundred became
active in the organized commerce and movement of trade in
the northern parts, i.e. Rajarattha, with Polonnaruwa as an
important centre.’ After the political unification of Vengi with
the Cola kingdom under Kulottunga I (accession aD 1070) the
Five Hundred are seen as far north as Visakhapattinam (Kulo-
ttungacolan pattinam) and other coastal towns upto Draksha-
rama in the Ganjam district of Orissa.** Under the Cola royal
patronage, Tamil traders moved more frequently into the
Andhra region and Cola mandalamuna Vyapari are referred to
in a few interior trade centres, while Ghantasala or Colapandi-
yan pattinam on the coast became an important emporium
of trade.** Trade, in fact, was much more directly regulated
under the middle Colas, Rajaraja I to Kuléttunga I (ap 985-
1118), whose interest in developing the Cola port of Naga-
ppattinam is well known. Their trade missions to China,
maritime expeditions to Srivijaya (1025) and abolition of tolls
by Kulottunga I,*” undoubtedly encouraged the movement of
itinerant traders, and helped in establishing trade links with
China. Their continuing interest in foreign trade is indicated
by the Canton inscription of Kuldttunga I’s reign, detailing
attempts made to establish a trading presence at that port.*®
In the heart of the Cola kingdom, i.e. the Kaveri delta, the
Five Hundred began its activity in the tenth century in Tirup-
purambiyam, Tiruvidaimarudar and various other centres such
as Tiruvelvikkudi, Tirunallaru, Tiruccengédu, Kéyil Tevarayan-
pettai and Tiruccorrutturai. They are seen as far south as Ukki-
rankottai (Karavandapuram), a fortified town in the Tirunelveli
district in the same period. In the middle Cola period, they
fanned out into Tondaimandalam, Kongu Nadu and Pandi-
nadu, the most notable example in the Pandya region being the
Erivirappattana at Tiruvalisvaram in the Ambasamudram taluk
(the newly developed Mulli nadu) of the Tirunelveli district,
with direct access to South Kerala through the Aramboli pass,
and also control over the southern Pandya region of the Tam-
raparni.?
_ The Entvirappattanas ofth is period are seen coming up mainly
in the trade routes, and even in the region of settled agriculture,
The South Indian Guilds / 319
like the wet zone of Tamraparni.” The participation of local
traders and magaram members in itinerant trade reached an
unprecedented degree and, hence, a series of settlements named
after the Ainnurruvar or Valanfijiyar were established as semi-per-
manent or permanent residential quarters in various centres.*'
It must, however, be pointed out that in the capitals of Tafjavur
and Gangaikonda Colapuram and the imperial port city of
Nagappattinam, and even in Kaficipuram and Mamallapuram,
the mdnagarams or local nagarams wielded greater influence,
while the Five Hundred and other merchant groups were more
or less confined to the routes linking all other outlying regions
(peripheral areas) with the Cola heartland, and to the commer-
cially important areas like Pudukkottai and Ramanathapuram
districts, and Kongu nadu, 1.e. Salem, Erode (Periyar) and
Coimbatore districts.
In the period of the later Colas (twelfth and thirteenth
centuries) and the Pandyas of the thirteenth and fourteenth
centuries, we notice a phenomenal increase in the activities of
the Five Hundred, with a clear tendency to expand its sphere
of influence and to show less reliance on royal support and
patronage, although many of the guild inscriptions are still
dated in the reign periods of the late Cola and Pandya rulers.
We have rather impressive evidence that in most centres of
distribution and emporia the Five Hundred acted jointly with
other organized groups like the Cittsrameli or Padinen Visaya
organization in the levy of maganmai and pattanappagud: (tolls
and shares or cesses of towns). In the elaborate prasastis of these
inscriptions mentioning the two organizations, the Cittirameli
is given the pride of place, followed by the Five Hundred.
Notable among these are the records from Tirumalai and Piran-
malai in Ramanathapuram district and Anbil, Korramangalam,
Tuvarankuricci and Kovilpatti in Tiruchirapalli district.” Here
they exercised their joint authority to levy and grant cesses and
tolls to the local temples on merchandise passing through the
region. The institutionalization of the coming together of several
organizations and their exercising joint authority is a con-
spicuous feature of the thirteenth and early fourteenth centuries
ap. However, it would appear that merchant bodies, particularly
the Five Hundred, had on no occasion the authority to levy
520 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
and grant such tolls, except in conjunction with the Cittira-
meli or the Padinen Visaya,* which refer to organizations of
agriculturists and local elite groups controlling production of
agricultural and other goods. Presumably, in the assignment of
brokerage and monopoly to individuals or groups of traders on
certain items of trade, the Five Hundred exercised its authority
jointly with the local nadu, nagaram members and the larger
agricultural organization of the 18 Visaya or Cittiramel:.“
The Cittiraméli Pertya nadu was an organization of agricul-
turists, whose inscriptions appear 1n important trade and urban
centres. It has been described as an agricultural guild by K.G.
Krishnan, who has analysed the evidence of inscriptions, not
only from Tamil Nadu, but also from Karnataka and Andhra,
where the Cittiraméli appears from about twelfth century AD.
The Okkalu of Karnataka, it is suggested, was a similar organiza-
tion.** The evidence on the Okkalu, however, does not point to
an organization of the Cittirameli type, but more to a group of
agriculturists in specific localities.
Dominant agricultural organizations jointly mentioned in
the ‘guild’ inscriptions, probably had commercial transactions
with the Five Hundred, exchanging agricultural products for
exotic and nonagricultural items. The growth in the power of
landowning classes is a marked development of the twelfth
century AD, both in South India and Sri Lanka. The links that
developed between the merchant guild and associations of
agriculturists were mainly due to the increase in the importance
of agricultural commodities in trade from the twelfth century
onwards. The urban development oft his period, and the growing
food needs of urban settlements, enhanced the influence of the
agricultural classes, for such needs could be satisfied only by
powerful peasant groups, who could mobilise grain and other
products for supply to itinerant traders through the local
markets.
, In the late thirteenth and early fourteenth centuries, par-
ticularly under the Pandyas, the joint presence of the weavers
with trading communities like the Five Hundred also suggests
a closer link between textile production and trade, and a certain
legitimacy derived from the presence of the crafts groups. It
would appear that weavers gradually took to trading in textiles,
The South Indian Guilds / 321
or worked for the itinerant merchant body by organizing pro-
duction for a wider market. At this point, references to Cilai
Cettis in the northern Tamil region (Kaficipuram) and in Kongu
(Dharmapuri) may be noticed in the thirteenth and fourteenth
century inscriptions.” The largest craft organization which came
to be set up by the fourteenth century AD was that of the weavers,
whose Mahandadu organization had its headquarters in Kafici-
puram, the most ancient textile centre of South India.** The
Saltyas and Kaikkolas, two weaver communities of South India,
came to be classified among the Right and Left Hand caste
division,*”? which arose in Tamil Nadu in the twelfth century
AD as a paradigmatic division, to determine the social and caste
status of the artisans and craftsmen apart from new ethnic and
economic groups. Craft groups other than the weavers also came
to be organized largely under this division. With the urbaniza-
tion of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, urban social strati-
fication invariably tended to use the three categories of
brahmana, Velala and the Right and Left Hand castes. With the
increase in organized commerce and itinerant trade and the
demand for textiles and other products, the artisan communities
also obtained special privileges, either from local chiefs or temple
authorities, and sometimes also through the good offices of the
merchant organizations.
In a slightly different context, the dependence of the crafts-
men on the merchant organizations is underlined, as seen in
the role of the merchants providing asylum to the craftsmen in
Erode as early as the eleventh century ap.” The merchant body
sometimes framed rules for the Valangai (Right Hand) and
Idangai (Left Hand), or granted them privileges, emphasising
the interdependence of these two sections of the commercial
world, especially in areas where the merchants assumed control
and management of temples and acted as protectors and patrons
of artisanal groups, as in the Kongu region. The artisan com-
munity is seen to be coming into its own after the twelfth
century AD, i.e. in the late Cola and Pandya periods. In the
predominantly agrarian set-up of Tamil Nadu, the artisans were
more often attached to the locality, 1.c. to the temple, the
land-owning brahmanas and Vélalas through inter-dependent
land tenures. However, changes in the agrarian organization, in
522 4 Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
the pattern of land ownership and the introduction of an
economy based on inter-regional trade, the demand for their
services both by local landed groups and by the itinerant
merchant organizations, acquired for them certain concessions
and privileges meant to improve their social position. In the
late twelfth century, the axuloma rathakaras in Punjai had special
privileges conferred on them.*! The artisan community became
participants in the gift-making processes, as seen in the thir-
teenth century inscriptions from Nodiydr (Tanjavur district)
where the Kanmalas of several places met and agreed to assign
the tithe collected from among themselves to the local temple,
and to get differences settled jointly with the temple trustees
and local chief.”
Craft production was perhaps more intensive in the Kongu
region, where the twelfth to sixteenth century inscriptions refer
to large-scale artisan activity and their participation in important
civic duties, for which special privileges were conferred on them.
Privileges were collectively granted to the Kanmalar communities
in Kaficikkuval nadu (thirteenth century), Vengala nadu (thir-
teenth century), Kangéya nadu and Pundurai nadu (fourteenth
century), under the Kongu Colas and Kongu Pandyas.*? Agree-
ments among artisan communities for various purposes also
became common during this period.
Thus, organized commerce by Nagarams, manigramam and
long-distance trade through itinerant merchant bodies, acceler-
ated the process of urban development, crafts organization, a
tripartite social stratification in an urban context in multi-
temple centres and single large temple centres, some of which
became pilgrimage centres, and also in administrative centres.
Many of these newly emerging socio-economic groups were
accommodated in the tirumadai vilagam of the temple centres.*
The dominant role of the Five Hundred in inter-regional
trade and commerce in South India is established beyond doubt
by the continuous occurrence ofg uild records in the three major
regions, 1.e. Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh. Fur-
thermore, their participation in overseas trade is also attested
to by the presence of guild inscriptions in northern Sri Lanka,
Siam (South Thailand), Sumatra and Burma.’> One of these
inscriptions, which is found in Barus (Loboe Toewa), Sumatra,
The South Indian Guilds J 323
is particularly significant, as it refers to Barus as Var6ca in
Tamil, and describes it as Matangari Vallava Desi Uyyakkonda
Pattinam and Vélapuram as a part of that pattimam, in which
the Five Hundred made arrangements in AD 1088-89, for a
regular income or gift in gold to the local chiefs of merchants,
to be paid by the Marakkala nayakan and others from South
India who came to that port.*® This inscription points to the
importance of the Southeastern trade in the eleventh century,
in which the Five Hundred not only played a dominant role,
but even had control of port towns.
The overseas trade links and the itinerant traders’ role in
establishing these links are attested to by the long lists of
expensive imported commodities given in their inscriptions.
Notable among them are the Shikarpur inscription in the
Shimoga district of Karnataka,” and the Piranmalai inscriptions
in the Ramanathapuram district of Tamil Nadu.* The Shikarpur
inscription talks of the merchants as travelling by land routes,
water routes, covering six continents, with superior elephants,
well-bred horses, large sapphires, moonstones, pearls, rubies,
diamonds, lapis lazuli, onyx, topaz, carbuncles, bdellium, sandal,
camphor, musk, saffron . . . selling wholesaie or hawking about
on their shoulders etc. Through this trade the royal treasury
was filled with gold and the royal family encouraged this trade
by being the greatest consumers of luxury items. The imported
items mentioned in the famous Piranmalai inscription are of a
different kind, like aloeswood (akhil), sandalwood, silk, rose-
water, camphor oil and perfume, apart from elephants and
horses, which are common in most inscriptions of South India.
Aloeswood, camphor, sandalwood, horses (and perhaps even
camels?) are mentioned in the Kovilpatti inscription of about
AD 1305.°° Most of these items came from Southeast Asia, except
horses which came from Arabia. Significantly, the Barus inscrip-
tion referring to the Five Hundred and dated in ap 1088-89
comes from the heart of the camphor growing area of Sumatra.”
Silk may have come from China, although whether it reached
the Cola-Pandya coast is not clear. Elephants from Burma and
horses from Arabia came both into the ports of the Western
coast and into Kayal pattinam on the Pandya coast, and
rosewater from West Asia. South India was both on the transit
524 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
trade and terminal trade from West Asia to China, through
Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia. Tondi and Kulasekharappattinam
were the ports at which many of the items were unloaded and
distributed. An interesting record from Tondi dated in aD
1269, registers an agreement by the Anjuvannam, Mani-
gramam, Samanta-Pandasdlis (probably stockists of commodities
at the port) and others residing there, to levy certain taxes on
commodities sold and purchased at the port, in order to meet
the rebuilding expenses of the mandapa of the local Siva
temple.*' Spices, pepper in particular, and incense, were some
of the other important items meant both for local consumption
and onward trade. The temples and mathas or monasteries of
the Tamil region were, next to the royal family, the greatest
consumers of most of the articles mentioned above.
Many other commodities mentioned in the Piranmalai and
other Tamil inscriptions, as well as the Chintapalle inscription
of about aD 1240 from Andhra,® refer to agricultural products
like paddy, sesame, pulses, betel-nuts and leaves, salt and raw
materials like cotton. Metals like copper, zinc, lead and iron
also figure among the items of trade. In fact, the only manufac-
tured good requiring technological skill and organized produc-
tion was textile (local cloth), and it is for South Indian textiles
that there was an ever-growing demand. Hence, the weaver
community gradually acquired a position of great social and
economic importance. This is attested to by the references to
Katkkolas and Saliya Nagarattar, who not only controlled produc-
tion and marketing of cloth, but participated in temple services,
donations, conduct of festivals, administration and manage-
ment.® There is also a noticeable change in the pattern of land
ownership, both weavers and merchants becoming important
land-owning communities and wielding considerable influence
in the localities where they hailed from.
If the presence of the guild inscriptions with their prasastis
and lists of items of trade may be taken as a direct indication
of distribution centres, most of them may be located in the
Pudukkottai, Ramanathapuram districts and along the trade
routes where Erivirappattanas were established. The guild inscrip-
tions often refer to the 18 pattanas, 32 Vela (or Vélar) purams,
64 Kadigai-t-tavalams from where the traders came.® Though it
The South Indian Guilds J 325
would be difficult to identify and locate all of them, it is quite
likely that some of the major centres with guild inscriptions
and the ports constantly used by traders are included among
them, such as Vafcimanagaram (Karur), Kodumbalur, Kulasek-
harappattinam, Alagaimangaram, Narttamalai, Tondi and Piran-
malai. There also emerged a series of coastal towns starting from
Tiruppalaivanam (Pulicat), the northernmost point in Tamil
Nadu, down to Korkai and Kayal in the mouth of the Tam-
raparni, marking a coastal route with halting stations and
distribution points used by the itinerant traders. Kovalam,
Sadras and Tranquebar were some of these towns which emerged
into prominence in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries aD.”
Organized commerce in this period followed exchange by
barter and also the use of money, although monetization in
medieval South India, at least down to the fourteenth century
AD, was mostly on a low key, particularly in Tamil Nadu. The
Vijayanagar period saw many important changes, including
greater monetization and emergence of individual traders and
master craftsmen, which indirectly affected itinerant trading
communities and their Samayam or organization.
The towns of Tamil Nadu, including the ones with guild
activities, differed in their administrative organization from those
of Karnataka. The latter had their pattanasvamis, who were heads
of towns and who presided over or participated in the meetings
of the merchant bodies and other local groups® (Shikarpur). No
such ‘lords’ of towns are known to have presided over the
nagarams or market centres or towns with guild inscr'ptions in
Tamil Nadu. There are, however, references to pattanasvami, who
along with members of the Padinen Visaya, levied cesses on
merchandise as in Piranmalai.” The nagarams of Tamil Nadu
were administered by the magaram members with the help of
accountants (nagarakkanakku) and other employees, the market
governed by a specific set of rules and regulations and maintained
through cesses and levies like angadippattam.* The merchant
bodies were subject to the common rules framed by the nadu,
nagaram, padinenbhumi and cittirameli organizations, acting joint-
ly in the form of an institutionalized forum, exercising authority
through levying cesses and tolls and controlling the distribution
of goods.
526 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Localized groups like Manigramam and Nagaram were power-
ful bodies, which diversified their activities by marketing special
items, as for example by forming sub-nagarams like the vaniya
nagaram, Sankarappadi nagaram, saliya nagaram and Sattum pan-
Satta nagaram dealing in oil and cloth respectively at various
centres like Valikandapuram, Séngalipuram, Tirukkéyilir and
other places.” The Paraganagaram or sea-faring merchants were
active in the region of Salem (Pullir) even as early as the early
Cola period.” Kudirai Cettis from Malaimandalam or Kerala
were horse dealers, who catered to the needs of the Cola kingdom
from the ninth to the thirteenth centuries.”!
The Vantya nagaram organized itself into a supra-local body
called the Vaniya nagaram of several regions or Padinen Visaya,”
somewhat like the Zéelzkis of Andhra. Individual traders some-
times used the title of Cakravarti, indicating the emergence of
merchant princes, as seen in the thirteenth and fourteenth
century inscriptions of Muttam (in Périr, Coimbatore) and
Sivayam or Ratnagiri (ancient Tiruvatpokki) in the Tiruchirapal-
li district. Among the signatories to the Piranmalai guild in-
scription, mention is made of a Samaya Cakravarti.” Political
stability disappeared with the decline of Cola power in the
beginning of the thirteenth century ap. References to Vira-
dalam and Suradalam in the guild inscriptions of this period”
probably indicate the usurpation of authority by powerful
merchants and local chiefs, taking advantage of the declining
Cola power and the relatively weaker Pandya power of the
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, in order to protect them-
selves and their newly gained wealth and status from other rivals
for power and position. At any rate, the fourteenth century
would seem to mark the end of the powerful merchant organiza-
tions in Tamil Nadu, although a temporary revival was brought
about under Vijayanagar in Karnataka and Andhra regions.
References
l. M. Abraham, ‘A Medieval Merchant Guild of South India’, Studies
in History, 1982, vol. wv, no. 1, 1. For the Karimi see also M.
Abraham, Two Medieval Merchant Guilds of South India, Delhi,
The South Indian Guilds P' 327
1988, 152, 176. A curious and untenable derivation has been
made of the term Karimi from Karyam, on the wrong assumption
that Karyam (affairs or work) is a Tamil word, whereas, in fact,
it is of Sanskrit origin and adopted in all the regional languages
of India, including Tamil. See Philip D. Curtin, Cross-Cultural
Trade in World History, Cambridge University Press, 1984, 115.
. K. Indrapala, ‘Some Medieval Mercantile Communities of South
India and Ceylon’, Journal of Tamil Studies, Oct. 1970, vol. u, no.
A. $1.
. Ibid., 32.
. Ibid., 37-8.
. Cittiraméli means the beautiful plough, wh.ch was the emblem
of this organization.
. South Indian Inscriptions (hereafter S//) vol. vm, no. 442 (Piran-
malai).
Tirumalai Inscriptions No. 10 of 1924 in Annual Report on South
Indian Epigraphy, 1923-4 (hereafter ARE).
SII, xm, no. 28 (Tiruvellarai); 283 of ARE, 1964-5 (Kovilpatti);
SII, tv, no. 147 (Salem).
. MGS. Narayanan, Cultural Symbiosis in Kerala, 4 and 29. Here
the Avjuvannam is taken to be an organization of Jewish traders.
10. Visakhappattinam inscription—S//, x, no. 651. See also K. Sun-
daram, Studies in Economic and Social Conditions in Medieval Andhra,
Madras, 1968, 94; Tittandatanapuram (Tondi) inscription—598
of 1926, ARE, 1926-7.
11. In the Kanara districts, a merchant body called the Hanjamana
or Hanjumanna was active from about the fourteenth century ab.
Was it the same as Anjuvannam? Could Anjuvannam and Han-
jumanna be derived from Anjuman?—Kaikini inscription (South
Kanara), Annual Report on Kannada Research in Bombay Province,
1939-40, no. 38. See also K.V. Ramesh, History of South Kanara,
Dharwar, 1970, 253, where the author suggests that Hanjamana
represented Arab-Persian merchants.
See Kenneth R. Hall, Trade and Statecraft in the Age of the Colas,
New Delhi, 1980, chapter 5.
Nagarattar is the designation of the Tamil trading community,
now also known as the Nattukkéttai Chettiars, in the Ramanatha-
puram and Pudukkottai districts.
14. Aihole Inscriptions—/ndian Antiquary (IA), vin, ux; TA, vi, 138 fn.
B.K. 289 of ARE, 1927-8.
15. Abraham, ‘A Medieval Merchant Guild’, 6; Two Medieval Merchant
Guilds, chapter i.
528 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
16. een
Hall, Trade and Statecraft, 151.
17. V. Manickam, ‘Some Trade Guild Epigraphs and Sculpture’,
Journal of the Institute of Asian Studies, 145-50. In the guild
inscriptions of Sri Lanka, the guild members are closely associated
with the Vélatkkarar, and the Valanyiyar are often referred to as
the ancestors/elders (mutatatyar) of the Velatkkdrar, who must
have moved into Sri Lanka along with the mercantile community.
See Indrapala, ‘Mercantile Communities’, 33.
. K.R. Venkatarama Atyar, ‘Medieval Trade, Craft and Merchant
Guilds in South India’, Journal of Indian History, 1947, xxv, part
1, 268-80; Indrapala, “Mercantile Communities’, 31-2.
. See Chapter 4, Table VI, in this volume.
. Abraham, Two Medieval Merchant Guilds, chapter u, 41ff.
. Abraham, ‘A Medieval Merchant Guild’, 4.
. ‘Cola Kulanvitaram Calukyanvayarum’, see Epigraphia Carnatica,
1x, Dodballapur, 31.
. See Indrapala, ‘Mercantile Communities’, 26.
. No. 10 of 1924. Tirumalai inscription dated ap 1233. The other
groups mentioned are Pandimandala Peruniravi Tisai Ayirattu
Ainnurruvar, Kolikkuricci Kadittavuia Tisai Ayirattu Aiffdrru-
var, etc.
25. That the members came from different castes, religions and
regions is indicated not only by the Tamil inscriptions, but also
by the Kannada and Telugu inscriptions of Karnataka and
Andhra—See Abraham, Two Medieval Merchant Guilds, chapter 11.
26. The early Brahmi inscriptions in Sittannavasal and the hoards
of Roman coins datable to the early centuries before and after
the beginning of the Christian era, indicate an early trade route
through this region. See Champakalakshmi, ‘South India’, in A.
Ghosh (ed.), Jaina Art and Architecture, vol. 1, Bharatiya Jnanpith,
1974, chapter 9; Mortimer Wheeler, ‘Arikamedu: An Indo-Roman
Trading Station on the East Coast of India’, Ancient India, July
1946, no. 2, 118-21.
. Abraham, ‘A Medieval Merchant Guild’, 7-9.
P.B. Desai, Jainism in South India, Sholapur, 1957, 25-7.
Champakalakshmi, ‘Kurandi Tirukkattampalli, An Ancient Jaina
ao of Tamil Nadu’, in Studies in Indian Epigraphy, 1975,
vol. 2, 89.
Munisandai inscription, Pudukkottai State Inscriptions (PS),
no. 61; Cettippatti inscription, PSI, no. 1083.
31. See Chapter 4 in this volume, 203.
32. Mudikondan Inscription, 2 of 1910, ARE, 1909-10.
The South Indian Guilds f 329
. Kattar Inscription, 256 of 1912, ARE, 1912-13 and Basinikonda,
342 of 1912, ARE, 1912-13.
. Indrapala, ‘Mercantile Communities’, 32-3; Abraham, ‘A Medie-
val Merchant Guild’, 12-14.
. Sundaram, Economic and Social Conditions, 93-6.
Ibid., 92-5.
K.A. Nilakanta Sastri, 7he Colas, Madras, 1975, reprint, 331.
_ Abraham, ‘A Medieval Merchant Guild’, 14; also Two Medteval
Merchant Guilds, 143.
See Chapter 4, Table IV, 22 and Table VI.
Ibid., 000.
. Ibid., Table V, no. 25; 150 of ARE, 1935-6.
Tirumalai—10 of 1924; Piranmalai—S//, vim, 442; Korramangalam—
650 of 1962-3; Tuvarankuricci—296 of 1164-5; Kévilpatti—286 of
1964-5.
. See Chapter 4, Table VI.
PSI. no. 125; 103 of ARE—1932-3.
_ K.G. Krishnan, ‘Chittiramélip-periyanadu—An Agricultural Guild
of Medieval Tamil Nadu’, Journal of the Madras University, Jan.
1982, reprint, vol. uty, no. 1.
_ Abraham, ‘A Medieval Merchant Guild’, 21.
165 of ARE, 1968-9; S//, vu, 583.
Vijaya Ramaswamy, Textiles and Weavers in Medieval South India,
New Delhi, 1985, 38-9.
Ibid., 55, 58-9 and 107-8.
Erode Inscription—215 of ARE, 1976-7.
Punjai Inscription—198 of 1925 (ARE, 1925-6).
Nodiyar Inscription—201 of ARE, 1932-3.
186 of 1911 (ARE, 1911-12); SH, m, 25; 227 of ARE, 1967-8.
_ SII, vi, 258 (Manimangalam); S//, xu, 154 (Chidambaram).
See Indrapala, ‘South Indian Mercantile Communities in Ceylon,
950-1250’, The Ceylon Journal of Historical and Social Studies, July-
Dec. 1971, n.s., vol. 1, no. 2; K.A. Nilakanta Sastri, ‘Takua Pa and
its Tamil Inscriptions’, Journal of the Malaya Branch of the Royal
Asiatic Society, 1949, xx, part 1, 25-30; Nilakanta Sastri, ‘A Tamil
Merchant Guild in Sumatra’, 7BG deel. txxu, 1932, 314-27. (Both
these articles are reprinted in Nilakanta Sastri, South India and
Southeast Asia, Mysore, 1978, 172-7 and 236-47); Epigraphia Indica,
vil, 197ff.
56. Y. Subbarayalu, ‘Sumatravil Tamil-k-kalvettugal’, in Avanam (Jour-
nal of the Tamil Nadu Archaeological Society), Jan. 1994, 116-24.
530 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Shikarpur Inscription, Epigraphia Carnatica, vol. vil, no. 118.
SIT, vii, no. 442.
286 of ARE, 1964-5.
M. Abraham, ‘A Medieval Merchant Guild’, 4 and 6; also Two
Medieval Merchant Guilds, 160.
. Tittandatanapuram (Tondi) Inscription—598 of 1926, ARE,
1926-7.
. 277 of ARE, 1934-5.
196 of ARE, 1912, SII, vi, 252 and 257; see also Ramaswamy, Textiles
and Weavers, 41-6 and 54-5.
. E.g. 154 of 1903; S//, vol. vin, no. 442.
. See Chapter 4, Table VII.
. Indrapala, “Mercantile Communities’, 29-30; G.R. Kuppuswami,
Economic Conditions in Karnataka (av 973-1336), Dharwar, 1975,
101, 113; Epigraphia Carnatica, vu, no. 94.
. SII, vu, 442.
. Hall, Trade and Statecraft, 58-60.
- Valikandapuram—309 of ARE, 1964-5 (Sankarappadi); Tiruppan-
gili-163 of ARE, 1938-9 (Vaniya Nagaram), Séngalipuram, 23
and 30 of 1917 (ARE, 1916-17); (Sattum Parisatta Nagaram);
Tirukkoyilur—S//, vi, 901 (Salika Nagarant).
Pullur Inscriptions—325 and 372 of 1939-40,
. See Chapter 6, 331.
Valikandapuram Inscription—264 of ARE, 1943-4: Vengalam
Inscription—141 of ARE, 1974-5.
Piranmalai Inscription—S//, vin, 442. Also in Ikkarai—Boluvam-
patti Inscription—415 and 418 of 1958-9; Sivayam Inscription—48
of 1913, ARE, 1912-13.
For Suradalam see Valikandapuram Inscription, 264 of ARE,
1943-4. For Viradalam see Valaramanikkam Inscription—Inscrip-
tions of the Pudukkottai State (/PS), 1022.
6
Imperial Power and Urban Growth
Kudamakku-P alaiyarai, the [win
Cities of the Colas
Pi of interpretation of epigraphic records, the main
source for the study of ancient and medieval South Indian
history, and the inadequacy of statistical data, have generally
deterred scholars from reconstructing the history of urban
development, despite their interest in the evolution of temple
complexes, peasant settlements and changes in the socio-
economic structure. However, epigraphic sources, when. supple-
mented with traditional and legendary accounts and archaeo-
logical data, provide fairly useful, though not exhaustive, in-
formation about the nature and evolution of urban centres
and the various factors contributing to the urbanization process
in the period from the seventh to the thirteenth centuries AD,
especially for the areas under the administration of the Colas.
This essay is an attempt to study the twin-city of Kudamukku-
Palaiyarai, which developed as an urban centre, mainly during
the Céla period in the Cola heartland.
Kudamukku (Map 10-1), alternately known as Kudandai, is
first mentioned as Kudandai in the Sangam works of the first
three centuries of the Christian era, and represents one of the
earliest Cola settlements in the delta region of the Kaveri valley.
It came to be known as Kumbhakonam from the fourteenth
century ap,' when a general tendency to Sanskritize all ancient
Tamil place-names evidently led to the change from Kudamukku
into Kumbhakonam.
Palaiyarai (Map 10-13), the second part of this urban complex,
dates from the period of the Saiva-Vaisnava religious develop-
ment of the seventh to ninth centuries aD.? The name Palatyarat
has two components—Palaiya + arai (= arruir), meaning ‘an old
settlement on the banks of a river.’ It was also known as
532 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Nandipuram, Ayirattli, Mudikondacélapuram and Ahavamal-
lakulakalapuram at various points of time. -
The geographical location of both Kudamukku and Palaiyarai
contributed in a large measure to their early development into
a rich source of revenue for the Colas. Situated between the
Kaveri and the Arisilaru (now called Arasalaru), Kudamakku
occupies a central position 1n the most fertile part of the delta
region, where the distributaries are close to one another. South
of Kudamukku, on either banks of the Tirumalarajan and
Mudikondan rivers, the city of Palaiyarai grew around the palace
of the imperial Colas.
The Arisilaru, one of the major distributaries of this river
system, 1s perhaps also the oldest. Among the others, the Vira-
colanaru, running north of Kudamukku, apparently owes its
origin to Parantaka I (c ap 907-55), one of whose titles was
Viracola. The Mudikondan may be dated from the period of
Rajendra I, who was also known as Mudikondacdla, a title which
provided Palaiyarai with the alternate name of Mudikonda-
colapuram. The Tirumalarajan also seems to have come into
existence in the imperial Cola period, for it flows through
Nandanmeédu, an ancient urn-burial and Black-and-Red Ware
site near Palatyarai. The Vettaru and Vadavaru, running south
of this urban complex, may also be dated back to the same
period, although no clear evidence of their origins can be found.
The existence of a series of canals (vaykkal) in this region would
further point to the efforts of the Colas to build and maintain
a fairly good irrigation network in this area as well as in other
parts of Colamandalam. At the same time, it may be noted that
the maintenance of small canals was often the concern of the
local assemblies like the Sabha and Ur and also the Mulapar-
sad looking after temple administration.
Kudamikku in the Pre-Imperial Cola Period
The antiquity of Kudamukku is indicated by the early Sangam
references to Kudandai (and also Kudandaivayil or Kudavayil),‘
where the Korra Colas kept their treasure strongly guarded. The
Cola king Cenganan kept his Cera rival Kanakkal Irumporai
imprisoned in Kudavayir-Kottam,' pointing to Kudandai as a
Imperial Power and Urban Growth f 333
Céla stronghold from the Sangam period. Besides Kudandai,
several other stttlements must have emerged before the begin-
ning of the Christian era, for the Sangam literary descriptions
of the Cola country clearly attest to the early colonization of
the Kaveri valley, ‘marked by rows of settlements of numerous
clans, who lived amicably with one another’.® This is further
substantiated by archaeological evidence coming from the Mega-
lithic urn-burial site of Nandanmédu,’ where the urn-burials
and Black-and-Red Ware occur in the exposed sections of the
Tirumalarajan river. Black-and-Red Ware is also found in the
lower levels of Sdlamaligai (Map 3-16), the site of the old Cola
palace. The Sangam settlements would seem to represent the
end phases of the Megalithic culture in Tamil Nadu and the
beginnings of the earliest well-attested pastoral-cum-peasant habi-
tations, as shown by the uniformity with which Black-and-Red
pottery occurs in the lowermost levels of every site so far
excavated in Tamil Nadu.°
Very little is known about Kudandai and its environs in
the post-Sangam period (the fourth to seventh centuries AD).
A general political vacuum set in after the Sangam Colas were
defeated by a ‘tribe’ or ‘clan’ called the Kalabhras who were,
from various literary and epigraphic descriptions, a non-
orthodox people with strong predilections towards the Buddhist
and Jain religions.’ The Colas remained in obscurity till their
re-emergence to power in the middle of the ninth century AD.
The importance of the Kudamakku region as a resource base,
was, however, so great that the Pallavas of Kafcipuram and
the Pandyas of Madurai, the leading powers of the period
between the seventh and ninth centuries, were drawn into a
series of major struggles for its dominance. Some of the
important battles between the two powers were fought on the
banks of the Arisilaru (or Aricit)'® and near Kudamakku itself."
The Pallava Nandivarman II was besieged by his Cola-Pandya
opponents at Nandipuram (Map 10-18—a part of Palaiyarai
city), from where he was released after a serious struggle by
his general Udayacandra."* Nandivarman III (c ap 846-69) is
described as the conqueror of Palaiyarai, where the ‘six armies’
fell in a mighty onslaught.’ Tiruppurambiyam, north of Kuda-
mukku (Map 10-7), was the battlefield which signalled the
534 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
decline of the Pallavas and Pandyas and the rise of the Colas
under Aditya I (c ap 871-907)."* :
It has often been suggested that the Colas of this period were
the subordinates of the Pallavas and Pandyas alternately,'° con-
sequent upon the nature and results of the Pallava-Pandya
conflicts for a hold over this region. It may be further suggested
that the Kudamukku region formed the nucleus of the rising
power of the Viyayalaya line of Colas. There can be little doubt
that the descendants of the Sangam Colas acquired their main
resources from this area, which continued to be their stronghold
even after the decline of Uraiyur and Kavérippumpattinam. The
choice of the imperial Colas fell on Tafijavar (Tanjore, Map 10)
as their new capital, and the capture of Tafjavar by Vijayalaya
from the Muttaratyar chieftains'® was certainly not without
significance, considering the geographical situation of the new
capital. Located on the south bank of the Vadavaru, Tafjavur
commanded access to the delta region, thus affording protection
to the perennial resource base of the Colas, represented by the
Kudamukku-Palaiyarai region.
The resource potential of this region is indicated not merely
by the numerous peasant settlements dating from the Sangam
period, but also by the tendency of all early brahmadeyas to be
clustered together and to proliferate rapidly in this area in the
period between the seventh and ninth centuries. Two of these
early brahmadeyas known as Simhavisnu-caturvédimangalam
(Kaficanur) and Mahendramangalam," may be dated back to the
period of the early Pallavas, i.e. Simhavisnu (c AD 550-90) and
Mahendravarman I (c. AD 590-630). One more brahmadeya was
created in the period of Nandivarman II Pallavamalla (c. aD 731-
96), viz., Dayamukhamangalam near Tandantottam (Map 10-8)'®
located immediately south-east of Kudamukku. A few towns also
came into existence by the ninth century AD. Kumaramiart-
tandapuram near Tirunagésvaram (Map 10-2) was a magaram
(town), which probably owed its existence to Nandivarman III,
one of whose titles was Kumaramarttanda.”’ Tiraimur, after which
the Tiraimur nadu was evidently named, was a magaram of
considerable importance,” and seems to have been a part of a
larger settlement, including Tiruvidaimarudar (Map 10-6), lo-
cated about five miles east-north-east of Kudamukku.
Imperial Power and Urban Growth J 335
The Kumbhakonam taluk had twenty-five out of a total of
ninety-three brabmadeyas in the Tanjavur district, the highest
number for a single taluk in the whole of Tamil Nadu, as seen
from an estimate made from the inscriptions of this region col-
lected up to the year 1915.” Further work in this direction has
already yielded evidence of many more brahmadeyas in the same
taluk, particularly in the environs of Kudamukku, emerging at
different stages between the tenth and thirteenth centuries AD.”
Il
The successive stages in the evolution of the Kudamukku-
Palaiyarai urban complex from the seventh to the thirteenth
centuries may be discussed in two parts, the first relating to
Kudamukku proper and its dependent settlements Itke Tiru-
nagésvaram, Tiruvalamculi (Map 10-3) and Tirukkarugavur
(Map 10-4), and the second dealing with the palace complex of
Palaiyarai and its environs. In each part, an attempt will be
made to show the expansion of the city during two broad
periods, the first representing the period between the seventh
and ninth centuries AD, and the second covering the imperial
Céla period (ninth to thirteenth centuries). The latter has been
further subdivided into three phases: the early Cola (aD 850-985),
the middle Cola (ap 985-1120) and the late Cola (ap 1120-1279),
for each temple-centred settlement, in order to maintain, as far
as possible, a chronological sequence.
The Kudamukku Complex
The evolution of the Kudamukku complex between the seventh
and ninth centuries AD is marked by the rise of temple
settlements, both Saiva and Vaisnava, celebrated in religious
tradition as the centres visited by the exponents of the bhakt:
cult—the Saiva ndyanars and Vaisnava dlvars. The modern town
of Kumbhakonam has eight Siva temples and twelve Visnu
temples, of which two Siva temples and one major Visnu
temple date from this period, viz., the Kudandai Kilkkottam
536 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
(the Nageésvara temple) and the Kayavarohana (the Kasi Visva-
natha temple) representing the Saiva settlements and the Sa-
rangapani temple representing the Vaisnava settlement. The
Tevaram® and Divyaprabandham” references to these temples
are mainly devoted to their religious importance and to the
glorification of the respective deities enshrined in them.
Architecturally, these shrines were unpretentious brick struc-
tures later converted into stone wmanas (central shrines with
towers),”> forming the nuclei of huge temple complexes, which
grew steadily in size, from the early Cola period, gaining addi-
tions of subsidiary shrines and enclosures and ending with the
tall towers (gopuras) of the Vijayanagar-Nayak period.
To the same period may be assigned the emergence of three
other temple centres in Tirunagésvaram, Tiruvalamculi and
Tirukkarugavur, although their inclusion in the Kudamakku
complex is known only from the early Céla inscriptions. Their
architectural development is similar to the temples of Kuda-
mukku proper and points to a progressive growth in size and
importance throughout the Cola period. Thus, it would appear
that by the time of the rise of the Colas, Kudamikku and its
environs came into prominence with five temple-centred settle-
ments, the majority of which were populated by the followers
of Saivism.
Kudamukku, under the imperial Colas, covered a much larger
area than the present town of Kumbhakonam. It extended over
the whole of Pambur nadu” (Map 9), which contained a cluster
of three brahmadeya-devadanas, viz., the main Kudamukku (or
Kudamukkil), Tirunagésvaram, a pal (=literally ‘in the vicinity
of’) of Kudamukku, and Tiruvalamculi. To this group of settle-
ments a fourth one called Tirukkarugavir may be added, as it
is described as a part of Kudamukkil, although it was not
situated within Pambur nadu. The madu was evidently not an
administrative division created by the Colas, but was distinctly
an agrarian unit which pre-dates the imperial Colas.?”? This may
be seen from the fact that Kudamukku and Palaiyarai were
located in different nadus, the former in Pambur nadu between
the Kaveri and the Arisilaru and the latter in Tirunaraiyar nadu,
covering the regions watered by the Mudikondan and Tiru-
malarajan (Map 9). The immediate hinterland commanded by
Imperial Power and Urban Growth J 337
this twin-city covered the whole area from the Kollidam (Cole-
roon) river in the north to the Vadavaru in the south.
During the early Céla period, the expansion of Kudamikku
reveals a steady growth, not only in the initial reconstruction
in stone of the traditionally important temples and their
architectural elaboration, but also in the increasing role they
played in the socio-economic and political activities of the
centre. The NagéSvara temple may be described as the main
institutional force through which the early Colas, starting from
Parantaka I, projected their growing power. The royal family
was directly involved in its reconstruction and elaboration, and
its maintenance through land grants and other gifts. The
major economic activity of Kudamukku was centred round
this temple, as seen in the nature of the endowments made
to it, in the form of land, cows, sheep, gold and money for
a variety of purposes like festivals, feeding of brabmanas and
other ascetics (S:vayogins), daily rituals and burning of perpetual
lamps. Apart from the royal family, the other social groups
involved in these activities were Cola officials of high rank,”
servants of the palace, personal retinues of the royal members
(Velams),” local merchants*' and traders from distant lands like
Malai nadu (Kerala).*? While land endowments were common,
money and gold gifts are found to be equally numerous, the
donors in the latter case being usually merchants, and, oc-
casionally, leading landowners’? (Vélalas) from various parts of
the Cola kingdom. The manradis (shepherds) represented an-
other class of people who were closely associated with the
administration of endowments, particularly of sheep,** while
the Mialaparisad of the temple, consisting mostly of brah-
manas, had control over the entire range of the temple’s activity,
including sale and purchase of landed property.’’ Members of
the Kaikkéla or weaver community, many of whom served as
members of the army, as terinja katkkolas (chosen Katkkolas)
offered gifts of sheep and also, occasionally, land, gold and
money.”°
The monetary gifts and transactions of the temple would
show that, apart from lumps of gold, weighed by the kalanju
standard, gold was also used in the form of money for purchase
of land,’ or as gifts for feeding brahmanas and ascetics.”® In fact,
538 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
it would appear from various such instances that, in the early
Cola period, the use of kalawju as coined money was coming
into vogue and was perhaps gradually replacing the use of metal
by weight. This is implied in the reference to a gift of one
hundred and five pieces of tulaippon in the reign of Parantaka I,
by a native of Ayirattali (Kandiyar) in Kilar Karram for fes-
tivals.? The fact that the earliest known Cola gold coin belongs
to Uttama Cola” (c. aD 965-85), would lend additional support
to the supposition that use of coined money was known in this
period, although the practice of donating lumps of gold con-
tinued. In another transaction, the assembly of Kudamukku
raised 500 kalanju of gold by sale of land, in order to pay an
impost of 3,000 kalanju levied on it by Parantaka I,*’ perhaps
in an attempt to raise funds for his Pandya wars, which plagued
the early Colas constantly till the virtual annexation of the
Pandya region by Rajaraja I and Rajéndra I (c. ap 985-1044).*
The Nagésvara temple continued to be the centre of all major
activities in Kudamukku till the KumbheSvara temple assumed
precedence in the post-Cola period on account of its religious
importance. References to the Avanakkalam (archives?) and Sr
Bhandaram (treasury and storehouse)* of the Nagésvara temple
would attest to its extensive functions of collection and redistri-
bution.
The second dévadana settlement in Kudamukku grew up
around the Somesvara temple, which dates from the middle
Cola period, for the earliest recorded land grant to this temple
is dated in the fifth regnal year of Rajaraja I (c< ap 970).* It
played a relatively less important role in the major activities of
this centre, as practically nothing is known about it after the
period of Rajaraja I till the late Cola period, when it acquired
independent status under the name Somanathamangalam and
came to be separated from Pambur nadu.*’ At the same time,
lands in distant regions were either gifted or sold to this temple
and the number of such transactions far exceeded the land
endowments to any other temple in Kudamikku during this
period. These lands were situated in the northern parts of Tamil
Nadu (Jayankondacélamandalam), and also in other parts of
the Cola country, such as Tiraimir nadu, Mirai Kirram and
Kilar Kurram. Two major structural additions were also made
Imperial Power and Urban Growth J 339
to it in the form of shrines dedicated to Siva as Nataraja and
Vinayaka.*°
In the post-Cola period this temple suffered neglect due to
the shift in importance to the Vaisnava sections of the Kuda-
mukku complex under Vijayanagar patronage. Hence its present
nickname, ‘élai Somanatha’ (‘poor Somanatha’).*”
The Sarangapani temple formed the nucleus of a large Vais-
nava settlement in Kudamukku. Traditional accounts and the
Divyaprabandham references would assign its origins to the
pre-Cola period, although no corresponding evidence comes
forth from other sources. Perhaps an indirect reference to it 1s
made in one of the early Cola inscriptions of the Nagesvara
temple, mentioning the temple of Jalasayana,* an assumption
which is strengthened by the fact that the Sarangapani temple
enshrines the reclining form of Visnu-Narayana, to which seven
of the dlvars have referred in their verses.*? However, in the
thirteenth century it was certainly an important part of Kuda-
mukku, as seen from the reference to the deity Aravamudu (i.e.
the name of the deity as given in traditional literature) in a
fragmentary inscription, palaeographically assignable to the thir-
teenth century.” Of the original shrine of the earlier period,
there is no trace, for the temple seems to have undergone major
structural elaboration twice, first under the late Colas, and later
under the Vijayanagar rulers. The architectural style and sculp-
tural decorations of the main vimana and the inner enclosures
show distinct characteristics of the late Cola style. An additional
evidence of this date is provided by the sculptures representing
Bharatanatya Karanas (poses) with label inscriptions datable to
the twelfth century on palaeographic grounds.®!
The second major centre, i.e. Tirunagésvaram, forming a part
of the Kudamukku complex, is about three miles east of modern
Kumbhakonam, situated outside the limits of the present town.
Its origins are assignable to the period of the Sativa nayanars,
but it developed as an important Saiva centre under the early
Célas. It appears to have replaced an earlier Jain settlement
around ap alli (Jain temple or monastery), which was patronized
by the perunagarattar (merchants of a big township) of Kumara-
marttandapuram in Tiraimir nadu, who made provisions for
renovating parts of it in the close of the ninth century AD.
340 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
The nagaram of Kumaramarttandapuram was closely associated
with the economic activities of Tiruvidaimarudur, and also of
the Jain settlement at Tirunagesvaram. :
Under the early Colas, the Naganatha temple which replaced
the Jain palli at Tirunagésvaram was the recipient of land and
money endowments from members of the royal family. The
direct involvement of the Mulaparudai (executive committee) of
Kudamukku in the temple administration of Tirunagésvaram,
is seen in its supervisory role in utilizing a money endowment
on behalf of the Naganatha temple for repairing damages caused
by floods to an irrigation channel.** The interest of this money
endowment was paid in the form of paddy for the exposition
of Sivadharma at Tirunagésvaram.
The royal family continued to be personally associated with
the grants to this temple under Rajéndra I. Senior officials and
members of the vélams also participated in such activities.®
Members of the elephant corps of Rajéndra’s army (ilatya Kunyjira
mallar = junior elephant mahouts) also figure as donors.** The
accumulated wealth of the temple in terms of jewels, gold, silver
vessels etc., were carefully registered by a temple servant, probab-
ly under the royal orders of Rajéndra I.°’ The use of gold, both
in the form of money and by the weight standard of kalanju,
was a regular feature at this centre in the early and middle Cola
periods,**
This temple settlement receded into the background due to
the withdrawal of active royal patronage after Rajéndra I, al-
though it remained an important part of this urban complex
down to the end of the Cola period, and continued to acquire
more lands in the twelfth century in the reign of Rajéndra II
(c. AD 1146-73).59
Tiruvalamculi,” now located outside the Kumbhakonam
town, at a distance of about two miles west, was perhaps the
largest of the temple settlements in this urban complex. Its
history is traceable, almost continuously, from the pre-Céla to
the Vijayanagar periods. The Siva temple of Kapardisvara,
around which this centre grew up, shares with other temples
of this region the ‘honour’ of being visited by the Saiva
nayanars, and hence acquired great religious importance under
the Colas. The temple passed through successive stages of
Imperial Power and Urban Growth J 341
enlargement under the Colas, and provides a remarkable ex-
ample of horizontal magnification, a late Cola phenomenon
in the architectural history of Tamil Nadu.
In the early Cola period, this temple acquired lands in
Innambar nadu.*' It is, however, in the middle Cola period,
especially under Rajaraja I and Rajéndra I, that it became the
centre of major activities. While numerous tax-free land grants
were made by the royal family in Tiraimur nadu, Innambar
nadu and Vennadu,” a rich variety of gold ornaments was
also presented to it by the Cola princesses in the reign of
Rajaraja I. An institution of higher learning called the Maligai
Mélaikkalliri in Tukkalivallam (not identifiable) was estab-
lished under Rajaraja I* as a part of this temple centre and
provisions were made by the king for its maintenance, evidently
through the temple.
Two new agraharas were added to this settlement in the late
Cola period. The first was the Vellaivinayaka-caturvedimangalam
(Map 10-12),°° which was established for the maintenance of the
Vellaivinayaka shrine, constructed in the late Cola period in the
outer enclosure of the temple. The second agaram, known as
the Akhilanayaka-caturvédimangalam, is described as an agaram
of Tiruvalamculi.
The majority of the land grants of the late Cola period were
intended for the Vellaivinayaka shrine and were located in
distant regions. Some of these grants were also made to the
main deity of the temple during the troubled period of the
Cola-Pandya wars of the early thirteenth century, both ‘for the
welfare of the inhabitants of this centre and for the success of
Rajaraja III’. The lands and house sites donated to both the
shrines were located in Innambar nadu, Nallir nadu, and
Tirunaraiyar nadu.” The increase in the land grants to this
temple in the late Cola period may be attributed to an attempt
to restore its original status to this centre, which became depopu-
lated due to constant wars and great political disturbance. Land
and house sites in Korrangudi, a hamlet of Akhilanayaka-
caturvédimangalam, were made over to the temple even under
K6épperufijinga,” the Kadava feudatory, who temporarily gained
control over the Colas early in the thirteenth century.
Horse dealers (Kudirai cettis) from MalJaimandalam (Kerala)
542 yf Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
still frequented this region in the thirteenth century and made
gifts of land to the temple.” The existence in Tiruvalamculi of
a group of Malaiyalar from Malaimandalam 1s also evidenced
by the referencet o some defaulters of land revenue raising loans
from them and from the temple treasury.”
Apart from land and gold, gifts of goats for lamp endowments
were the most frequent at this temple, and the manradis figure
prominently, as in other temples, in the maintenance of such
grants.” .
Tirukkarugavur (also called Tirukkalavur), situated about thir-
teen miles south-west of modern Kumbhakonam, represents the
third major settlement outside the present town, which is de-
scribed as a part of Tirukkudamukku in Pambur nadu.” It
contained three temples dedicated to Siva, Visnu and Pidari, a
local deity accepted in the brahmanical fold as an aspect of Sakti.
The Siva temple assumed the dominant role in the evolution of
this settlement, and may be dated from the period of Saiva
nayanars. Originating as a small structure, without great architec-
tural merit, this temple rose to prominence under the early Colas
The endowments made in this period consisted mostly of land
grants from a variety of people, i.e. members of the royal
velams at Taiyavur,”* women servants attached to temples,” royal
officers,” elephant mahouts,” and also merchants from Nan-
dipuram.” Under a royal order from Parantaka I, the land owned
by this temple, together with those of the Visnu and Kala Pidari
temples, were listed and carefully recorded.”
This centre ceased to be an important part of this urban
complex after the tenth century aD, although its religious char-
acter persisted, due to its association with the Tevaram hymnists.
The withdrawal of royal patronage perhaps led to its neglect by
the other social groups in the urban milieu of Kudamukku-
Palaiyarai.
Post-Cola Developments in Kudamiukku
In the post-Céla, i.e. Vijayanagar-Nayak, periods Kudamakku
proper underwent a series of changes, resulting in a general
decline of the temples of the Céla period and the emergence
of new centres of religious importance. There was a clear shift
Imperial Power and Urban Growth J 345
in royal patronage from Saiva to Vaisnava religious institutions,
although the Saiva temples continued to be centres of worship
as they did not lose their hold entirely over the religious
sentiments of the people. The Adi KumbheSvara gained prece-
dence over the rest of the Saiva shrines and two new Visnu
temples, viz., the Ramasvami and Cakrapani temples, arose and
vied with the older Sarangapani temple for royal favour and
religious importance.
The KumbheSvara temple may be dated from the Vijayanagar
period, both on the basis of its architectural style and the
Vijayanagar inscriptions recording the earliest land grants to the
temple. The Mahamakam tank, considered to be the most
sacred tank and of great ritual significance, also came to be
associated with the festival of Masi Magha (in February) celeb-
rated in the KumbheSvara temple, thus enhancing the sanctity
of the latter. A ritual bath in this tank is believed to be equivalent
to a holy dip in all the sacred rivers of India. This event takes
place once in twelve years on the Mahamakam day, representing
the South Indian counterpart of the Kumbhamela of Prayaga.
A series of sculptures representing all the river goddesses of
India is found near this tank, in the precincts of the Kasi
Visvanatha temple. On stylistic grounds, they may be assigned
to the early Céla period,*! thereby indicating the probable sacred
associations of Kudamukku with the river goddesses as early as
the tenth century ap. The tank and the festival are referred to
by the twelfth century Saiva hagiological work, viz. the Pertya
Puranam,” while narrating the story of the Saiva saint Samban-
dar and his visit to the Siva temples at Kudamukku. Presumably,
the festival is much older than its specific connections with the
KumbheSvara temple in the Vijayanagar period.
The Sarangapani temple owes its renovation and architectural
elaboration, including five tall towers (gopuras), to the Vijayanagar
rulers. Beginning from Virupanna Udaiyar in ap 1385, when the
name Kumbhakonam appears for the first time in the temple
inscriptions,” many members of this ruling family extended their
patronage to it. Krsnadevaraya chose to make provisions for
special worship after setting up a record of his achievements in
the temple. Merchants from the Telugu region also began to
visit this sacred centre and make land and money endowments.”
344 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
A Vaisnava matha came to be attached to this temple in
the period of Raghunatha Nayaka (seventeenth century),®* and
it has served ever since as an important pontifical seat of the
South Indian Vaisnavas. It was, perhaps, also in the same
period that a separate agaram was formed west of the Saranga-
pani temple, after a gift of house-sites in the main street was
made by Kacciyarayar, a high official residing at Gangai-
kondacélapuram.”
The Ramasvami temple was one of the new Vaisnava centres
which came up in this period, and its construction is assigned
to Raghunatha Nayaka of Tafjavur.®* It represents a unique
instance of a Rama temple enshrining in its sanctum sanctorum
the brothers of Rama, apart from the usual Rama group con-
sisting of Rama, Sita and Laksmana. The huge mandapas of this
temple carry on their composite pillars interesting iconographic
forms of Visnu, apart from secular figures representing members
of the Nayak family.
A large part of west Kumbhakonam, not far from the
Sarangapani temple, is occupied by the Cakrapani temple and
its residential area, which seem to have come into existence in
the Vijayanagar-Nayak period. ‘The present Visnu temple has
evidently replaced an earlier Siva shrine, as suggested by a
thirteenth century inscription built into the madappalli (kitchen)
of this temple, recording a gift to the shrine of Tirukk6lisvaram
Udaiyar.” A Sri Vaisnava religious head, known as Koyil Kanda-
dai Nayan Alvar Jiyar, made provisions in §. 1427 (ap 1505)
for offerings to the deity and their redistribution among Sri
Vaisnava pilgrims,” thus controlling the redistributive func-
tions of the temple in the sixteenth century aD.
Apart from the Sri Vaisnava religious organizations mentioned
above, Kumbhakonam also became the centre of two other
monastic establishments, viz. the Sankaracarya matha and the
Vira Satva matha (Hirtya matha). The former seems to have been
established as early as the thirteenth century.”! Endowments were
made to it under the late Vijayanagar ruler Venkata V in §. 1632
(AD 1710).” The latter came into existence during the reign of
king Vira Narasimha in early sixteenth century ap.” All these
monastic establishments exercised considerable influence over
the religious life of Kumbhakonam in the Vijayanagar and Nayak
Imperial Power and Urban Growth ff 545
periods, and some of them, like the Sankaracarya matha and the
Vaisnava matha attached to the Sarangapani temple, continue
to play a significant role in the religious activities of South
India even today.
The general trend towards Vaisnava dominance may perhaps
be attributed not merely to royal patronage, but also to a gradual
intensification of the Vaisnava movement after Ramanuja, 1.e.
after the twelfth-thirteenth centuries aD. The sectarian split into
the Vadakalai and Tenkalai among the Vaisnavas due to the
liberalization of Vaisnava ideology initiated by Ramanuja, led
to an increase in Vaisnava mathas.”*
The Palaiyarai Complex: Seventh—Ninth Centuries ap
The Palaiyarai complex, situated in Tirunaraiyur nadu, extended
over the banks of the Tirumalarajan and Mudikondan. During
the course of the seventh-ninth centuries AD it developed as a
large city with ‘wide streets and tall structures’”* consisting of a
palace of the Colas” and the residence of administrative officers.
This complex grew around a large number of religious settle-
ments and the administrative and military establishments of the
Colas.
The earliest settlement of this region was located at Vadatali
or Vallalarkoyil near Mulaiyur (Map 10-17), which was the scene
of a major religious conflict between the Saivas and Jains,”
which led to the decline of the Jain settlement which originally
existed here. The Jains appear to have settled at various parts
of the Kudamikku-Palaiyarai region in this period. Quite a few
Jain settlements are known from references in the inscription
of this region. The Tirunagésvaram inscriptions, mentioned
earlier, and an inscription of the ninth-tenth century AD built
into a doorjamb of the Kumbhéévara temple,” which points to
the existence of a Jain palli at Dipankudi in the Nannilam taluk,
and also the reference to the visit of Jain nuns from Palaiyarat
to the sacred Jain hill at Kalugumalai in the Tirunelveli district,”
are sufficient proof of the influence that the Jains wielded here
before the Saiva revival.
The second important settlement of this region was Nandi-
puram (present Nathankoyil, Map 10-18) which grew around a
346 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Visnu temple referred to in the hymns of Tirumangai Alvar as
Nandipura Vinnagaram.' The construction of this temple 1s
attributed to Nandivarman II, the Pallava ruler of the eighth
century AD. Amar Nit: Nayanar, one of the sixty three Saiva
saints of Pertya Puranam, who has been assigned to this period,
was a rich merchant who traded in cloth, gold and gems.!” It
may be presumed that he lived in Nandipuram, which was a
regular colony of merchants.'”
A third settlement, which emerged in the same period, was
Tiruccattimurram in Pattisvaram (Map 10-14). It was the scene
of a miraculous episode connected with Tirujmanasambandar,
who received a ‘pearl canopy’ by ‘divine grace’ when he visited
the temple.'® Evidently, the temple was originally a small shrine,
later renovated and enlarged under the Colas.!™
iPa laiyarai in the Cola Period
The earliest settlement assignable to the Cola period is the
Arumolidevisvaram (the present Somanatha temple at Kilpalai-
yarai) erected by Rayjaraja I, whose personal name was Aru-
molideva. It is located at a distance of about half a mile from
Nandipuram. The present structure hardly contains any evidence
of its date, due to large-scale renovations in the Vijayanagar
period, but its existence in the middle Cola period is established
by a reference to a dévadana village belonging to this temple in
an inscription of Rajaraja I from Tirunaraiyur (Map 10-9).!°
Next in the chronological sequence of the emergence of
settlements in Palaiyarai may be placed apa llippadai, a sepulchral
monument (present Ramanathan Koyil in Pattisvaram), built
by Rajendra I for one of the queens by the name of Paiica-
vanmahadévi.' This temple seems to have been a centre of the
Pasupata sect of Saivism, as indicated by a reference to Lakulisa
Pandita, a Pagupata teacher, in its foundation inscription. The
considerable influence that the Pasupatas wielded in Palaiyarai
is further attested to by the presence of 108 sculptured figures
Of Saivacaryas belonging to this sect, with label inscriptions, in
the Darasuram temple,!” built in another part of Palaiyarai in
the twelfth century ap.
Two more temple settlements, which came up in Palatyarat
Imperial Power and Urban Growth / 347
in the twelfth century AD, were centred round the Siva temple
called Virudarajabhayankarésvaram Udaiyar, and the remarkable
late Cdla edifice known as RajarajeSvaram, now called Dara-
suram (Map 10-19). The former temple is located between the
sites of Sdlamaligai and Nandanmédu, and is in a highly
dilapidated state. The inscriptions of this temple date from
about the twelfth century aD and record various grants made
by the late Cola rulers. It was replaced by a Visnu temple called
Gopinatha Perumalkoyil under the Vijayanagar rulers.'*
The Rajarajésvara temple at Darasuram was built in the reign
of Rajaraja II (c. av 1146-73).'” Architecturally the most remark-
able of the temples of Palaiyarai, it represents a rare example
of Calukya influence over the temple architecture of Tamil
Nadu, and may perhaps point to the existence of Calukya
architects and sculptors in this centre, especially after Rayadhiraja
I’s victory over Kalyanapura, the Calukya capital, from where
he brought back as war trophy a dudrapdla image!" found at
the entrance to the main enclosure of this temple. The pillared
mandapas of this temple, it may be added, carry madantka figures
typical of the Calukya style.'"'
Land and other endowments to this temple was fairly numer-
ous and included a fruit garden.''? Even in the thirteenth century
ap the Pandyas of the ‘second empire’ are seen making grants
of land to this temple for repairs and renovation and for the
celebration of festivals.'”
The major factor in the urban development of Palatyarai
was obviously its choice by the Colas as their residential capital.
The political disturbances of the post-Sangam period kept the
COlas in obscurity till they reappear in the same region in the
seventh-ninth centuries AD, still in a state of subordination to
the Pallavas and Pandyas. Their re-emergence to political power
under Vijayalaya in the ninth century AD was evidently facil-
itated by their hold over the delta region. All the early
inscriptions of Aditya I and Parantaka [| show that their
activities were mainly centred round this area. The preference
of the imperial Colas for Palaiyarai is seen in the way every
Cola ruler, starting from Aditya I, not only used it as his
residential stronghold, but also personally contributed to its
development by erecting temples, either in the Kudamukku or
548 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Palaiyarai section and their environs, and making rich endow-
ments of land and gold.
A series of army cantonments also seems to have surrounded
the palace area, as is revealed by the names of several small
villages and hamlets at present bearing names ending in padai-
yur or padaividu (Map 10-20 to 23).'* Frequent references to the
members of the army (teri#ja Kaikkolas) and elephant mahouts
participating in the gift-making processes of various temples have
already been noted. A section of the army called the Pandippa-
dai is mentioned in an inscription of Parantaka I in the Nagésvara
temple. A whole group of army men (sénaiyar) was entrusted with
the protection of temple endowments at Tiruvidaimarudur.'"®
One of the padarvidus at Ayirattali (Palaiyarai) is mentioned in
the Pallavarayanpéettai inscription of the eighth year of Raja-
dhiraja II (c aD 1171), which refers to the removal of the two
infant sons of Rajaraja II from the padaividu toa place of safety,''
probably on account of the threat to their lives from rival
claimants to the Cola throne.
In spite of the fact that the more successful Colas, viz.,
Rajaraya I and Rajendra I, either chose Tanjavur for their monu-
mental edifices and rich benefactions, or founded an entirely
new administrative centre like Gangaikondacolapuram, Palai-
yarai never ceased to function as an administrative centre. The
Cola family continued to live in Palatyarai. Sundara Cola’s
preference for Palaiyarai is implied in a statement found in the
commentary on Virasoliyam, a Buddhist work on grammar, that
he was the king of Nandipuram or Palaiyarai."'? Rajaraja I
himself drew a large number of his employees to the Tafjavir
temple from various parts of his kingdom, and many of them
were originally employed as dancers and musicians at Palatyarai
and other early Cola centres near Kudamukku.!'!® Members of
the vélams at Tafjavir are frequently seen at Kudamikku and
its environs making endowments to and worshipping at the
various temples of this area, evidently due to their personal
associations with it. Rajéndra I issued his Tiruvalangadu grant
from a secret apartment (maraividam) in Mudikondacolapuram,
.¢. Palatyarai.'” In the reign of Kulottunga I (c ap 1070-1118),
envoys from Kadaram (the Sri Vijaya kingdom of Sumatra and
Malaysia) submitted their petition to the king seated in his
Imperial Power and Urban Growth ys 349
coronation hall at Ayirattali (Palaiyarai), for the issue of a grant
to the Cudamanivarma Vihara at Nagappattinam.'”? Tribute
bearers from the ‘island kingdoms of the wide ocean’ waited at
the gates of Kuldttunga’s palace at Ayirattali.!?!
Thus, the position of Palaiyarai as the nerve-centre of the
Céla administration remained unchanged throughout the Cola
period. The Pandyas of early thirteenth century aD clearly
recognized the importance of Palaiyarai when they celebrated
their victory over the Colas by performing vira and vyaya
abhisekas in Palaiyarai.'?* Following this, the rapid decline of the
Colas by the second half of the thirteenth century and their
disappearance from the political scene, led to the disintegration
of Palaiyarai into small villages and hamlets representing the
sites of the old settlements.
Post-Cola Developments in Palaiyarai
One of the major developments of the Vijayanagar period was
the revival and enhancement of the religious importance of this
centre through the renovation and architectural elaboration of
the older temples and the erection of new ones. Two of them,
in particular, received special attention due to their association
with the Tevdram hymunists. Tiruccattimurram was the recipient
of land grants during the reigns of Praudhadéva Maharaya (c
AD 1447)! and Déviraya Maharaya (c. 1450).'* A towering
gopura was erected for the temple by a mahamandalesvara of this
period by the name of Goppayadéva Maharaya.'”
A colony of Saurastra weavers called the Pattunulkaras came
up around the Pattisvaram temple during the Nayak period.
This community was, perhaps, the dominant social group in
this centre, since an agreement made between them and the
cettis (merchants?) provided for their ritual precedence in the
matter of receiving betel and nut on marriage occasions and
offering of cloth, betel leaves and nuts to the goddess of the
temple.'*° Subsequently, this temple came to be classified as one
of the most sacred Saiva firthas, along with Vriddhacala (South
Arcot district), Tiruvarir, Tiruvenkadu and Chayavana (Tanya-
vur district).'?” :
Pattisvaram also became the centre of three Saiva mathas
3550 ff Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
named after the Saiva saints Tirumular, Navukkarasar and Sam-
bandar. Existence of these mathas is known only from a late
inscription, perhaps of the Nayak period,'* although their
origins may be traced back to the late Cola and Pandya periods,
i.e. thirteenth century.!”
Tiruvidaimarudar
Tiruvidaimarudur, located about five miles east-north-east of
Kumbhakonam, was an outlying town, the development of
which had close links with the urban complex of Kudamukku-
Palatyarai and also with Tanjavur and Gangaikondacolapuram.
The nucleus of this large temple complex was a Siva shrine
which belongs to the period of the Tevaram. The earliest datable
structure, i.e. the main shrine, however, seems to have been
constructed in brick by the late Pallava ruler Nandivarman III
and rebuilt in stone in the early Cola period.’
The Sabha or the brahmana assembly of Tiruvidaimarudir
and the nagarattar of Tiraimiur jointly administered the temple
endowments,!?! and evidently also managed the affairs of the
two major parts of this settlement, the brahmadeya of Tiruvidai-
marudur and the nagaram (town) of Tiraimir. A large contingent
of the Cola army (sénatyar) was stationed in this centre and was
entrusted with the protection of all major endowments to the
temple.!*
Throughout the Cola period, members of the royal family
visited the temple and personally offered worship.!33 However,
the most significant period of its activity was under the early
Colas, when, apart from the royal family, officers of high rank,
the Kaikkola army and other leading landowners were associated
with the temple and its religious functions.'%4
Local merchants, merchants from Kumaramarttandapuram,
Nandipuram, Tiruvisalir (in the Kumbhakonam taluk) and
Mayilarppil (Mayilappur—one of the oldest parts of Madras city)
visited the temple and made various gifts in kind and money."
The gold and money endowments in the form of kalanju,
kasu and ilakkasu (silver coins?)'36 would indicate frequent mon-
etary exchanges in the early and middle Cola periods by local
traders and itinerant merchants. The itinerant merchants’ guild
Imperial Power and Urban Growth ¥ 351
called the Tigai (Tisai) Ayirattaifnurruvar, seems to have erected
a mandapa in the temple which was named after the guild.'””
A Salai of brahmanas (educational institution) was attached
to the temple, to which several grants were made in the reign
of a Parakésari, one of the early Cola rulers.'8* The Kavanam of
the temple provided the venue of the meetings of the naga-
rattar.” A natakasalai (theatre) also came to be established, with
its own troupe of musicians; dancers and a dance master. Special
grants of land were made for the maintenance of the theatre
and its artists." A separate residential area was set up for the
Uvaccas (drummers?) of the temple and permission was granted
to them to construct houses with tiled roofs,'*! a rare privilege
given to such low-caste groups.
The Tai Pusam (Pusya day in the month of January-February)
was the biggest festival at the centre and attracted a large crowd
of pilgrims, who offered various gifts, especially of pots made
of copper and silver,’ which is believed to bestow great
religious merit on the donor. The festival drew pilgrims from
Tanjavur, Gangaikondacolapuram (G.K. Colapuram-Map 10),
Kudamikku, Tiruvellarai (Tiruchirapalli district), Anaimanga-
lam, near Nagappattinam, and other parts of the Cola country,
and also from Kaficipuram in the northern part of Tamil
Nadu.'”
The urban development of this centre was mainly the result
of religious and commercial activities throughout the Cola
period. Its proximity to the residential capital of the Colas
considerably enhanced its importance, apart from its geographi-
cal location on the routes connecting the delta region to the
coast and to the northern parts of Tamil Nadu. In the post-Cola
period, its religious importance remained as the sole factor in
maintaining its urban activities, though on a much smaller scale
than before.
Ill
The most important factor in this process of urbanization would
be the geographical situation of Kudamikku in the fertile delta
region of the Kavéri. Numerous peasant settlements arose in
552 J Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
this region from the Sangam period down to the thirteenth
century, forming the main resource base of the Colas. The
crucial stage in its development into an urban centre would be
the period of the proliferation of the brahmadeya-devadanas, the
seventh to ninth centuries aD, henceforth a continuous phenom-
enon, showing the availability of sufficient resources for sup-
porting a large population. For every brahmadeya settlement there
were about ten to twenty non-brahmadeya or peasant settlements,
which is seen in the number of places mentioned in the grants
recorded in the temples. The non-brahmadeya villages pre-dated
the emergence of brahmadeyas, and would represent the later
vellan-vagai villages, a classification brought in by the Colas.
Burton Stein’s description of such brabmadeyas as large pluralistic
centres with sacred and economic functions! would be relevant
to Kudamukku also.
The importance of the geographical factor is enhanced by
the links that Kudamakku established between the interior and
the coastal regions. Under the Colas, a large communication
network came to be established in Tamil Nadu, and Kudamtkku
served as the point of convergence of all major routes which
passed through the core region of the Cola kingdom. Of ancient
highways, there is a single but nonetheless important reference
to the Tafijavir Peruvali (the great road to Tanjavir) which
passed through Muniydr (Munniyar in inscriptions), south-west
of Kumbhakonam. If modern roads are any indication, Kuda-
mukku may be seen to connect the roads from Tafjavar and
Uraiyur to Nagappattinam, the Céla port, and from Gan-
gaikondacolapuram to the coast. The road to Chidambaram in
the South Arcot district, which was a major brahmana settlement
and religious centre, dating from pre-Céla times, and where
many of the imperial Colas preferred to celebrate their anoint-
ment ceremony, evidently started from Tanjavar and passed
through Kudamakku and Sirkali. From Sirkali, a road branched
off to the earliest Céla port of the Kaverippumpattinam, a route
which the Sangam Colas may well have used.
It would be difficult to ascertain the importance of rivers in
the transport system oft he Cola period, for on the navigability
of the rivers of this region, there is no contemporary evidence.
Yet, it may be surmised that for shorter distances the Kaveri
Imperial Power and Urban Growth J 353
and its distributaries provided safe transport facilities for goods
and people. The Arisilaru, it may be pointed out, reaches the
sea near Karaikkal, north of Nagappattinam, and could have,
at various points, served in a relay transport between the delta
and the coast.
The second dominant factor in the urban development of
this region was the choice of Kudandai by the Sangam Colas
as their stronghold for ‘guarding their treasure’, and of Palaiyarai
as the residential capital by the imperial Célas. This becomes
fairly clear also from the fact that the decline of the Colas, and
their total disappearance as a political force in the thirteenth
century, resulted in the disintegration of Palaiyarai into a num-
ber of small villages and hamlets, which became suburbs of the
modern Kumbhakonam town (Map 12).'*° Similarly, Tiruvalam-
culi and Tirunagesvaram also fell out of Kudamukku, and
became separate villages centring round their respective temples.
The main centre of Kudamukku alone survived as the remnant
of this large urban complex, its modern status as the head-
quarters of a taluk being largely due to its position as the focal
point of a large urban centre.
The changing complexion of this region is already seen in the
large-scale renovations and structural additions to the temples
and the erection of new ones in the post-Cola period, in an
attempt to restore the sacred character of Kudamukku. Thus,
under the Vijayanagar-Nayak rulers (fifteenth to eighteenth cen-
turies) the religious factor persisted as the underlying force
retaining the urban character of Kumbhakonam.
Trade was, to begin with, incidental in this process of ur-
banization. However, it soon acquired a dominant role, as the
presence of the royal family, its vélams, military cantonments
and administrative officers, together with its intensive religious
activity, inevitably attracted trade, sufficiently lucrative, to draw
traders from distant parts of Tamil Nadu like Mayilappur and
from Kerala. Money exchange was becoming a regular feature
from the early Cola period, although the use of lumps of metal
by a certain weight appears to have continued, The Cola mint
is believed to have been located in Kudamukku,'” and the site
of the mint is represented by the Kambatta-Visvanatha temple
in Rajéndranpéttai. In the same area are also located two streets
554 if Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
known as the Nanayakkara Chetti street (the street of moneyers?)
and the grain dealers’ street.
Much of the trade and commercial activity was controlled
by local merchants of Kudamukku and Nandipuram, who must
have been in close contact with the itinerant merchant guilds
and traders from outside the Cola country. Although no direct
evidence is available of the presence of the larger merchant
corporations within the city, there are enough indications of
their constant movement in this area. References to the Valan-
jiyar of Tiruppurambiyam,'”” the Tisai Ayirattaififurruvar at
Tiruvidaimarudur, the nagarattar of Kumaramarttandapuram
and Tiraimur are too numerous to be devoid of any significance.
The last two were local merchant organizations, while the first
two were the larger merchant guilds known to have been active
in medieval South India, Ceylon and Southeast Asia.
Articles of trade must have included cloth (silk and cotton),
gems, and other luxury items, coconuts, fruits, flowers, arecanuts
and betel, incense, oil and ghee. Kudamukku itself was a major
centre of betel and areca cultivation, as it still continues to be
renowned for both the products throughout South India. The
temples were the biggest consumers of such goods, representing
the religious counterparts of the royal establishment in Palatyara.
Horses and elephants were obviously in great demand in the
palace and cantonment area.
Textile and metal-ware were evidently the two major in-
dustries which developed in this urban centre. The Kazkkolas,
who were temporarily engaged in military activities in the Cola
period, were a weaver community who carried on their profes-
sion as weavers simultaneously. They ceased to serve as members
of the army in the post-Cola period and confined themselves
to weaving, and have, to this day, remained the major weaver
community of Tamil Nadu. The evolution of a Pattunulkarar
settlement in Pattisvaram, and the probable emergence of a
Saurastra colony around the Cakrapani temple in Kumbha-
konam in the Nayak period, would also show that a fairly
large weaver population was attracted to this region in the
seventeenth century AD, evidently due to its reputation as an
important weaving centre. Kumbhakonam continues to manu-
facture cotton and silk textiles to this day.'*
Imperial Power and Urban Growth / 355
Vessel-making was apparently the second major craft of this
urban centre, both in the Cola and post-Cola periods. The
survival of this traditional craft, which remains unsurpassed in
Tamil Nadu, is attested by the rows of vessel-shops in modern
Kumbhakonam and ‘Kumbhakonam vessel-shops’ located all
over Tamil Nadu, providing a rich variety of copper and brass
vessels. Kumbhakonam vessels are a household feature in Tamil
Nadu, particularly in the Tanjavur district.
Bronze-casting by the cre perdue process was yet another
flourishing craft of this urban centre. The demand for the craft
was continuous, as bronze images were set up constantly for
processional and ritual purposes and for religious merit,’
requiring the services of sthapatis skilled in this art. The sthapatis
involved in this activity seem to have had a major centre at
Svamimalai near Tiruvalamculi, where generations of artisans
executed bronze images of exceptional beauty, in a technique
in which they attained a remarkable degree of perfection. Svami-
malai is even today the major centre of this craft in the Tanjavur
district.
This huge urban complex consisted of various social and
occupational groups,' among whom a fairly large group of
architects and stone-sculptors must be included. The continuous
presence of architects, stone masons and sculptors is clearly
indicated by the incessant temple-building activity from about
the ninth century AD to the Vijayanagar-Nayak periods. Temples
began as small ‘nuclear’ shrines (garbha-grha), and expanded in
size, both vertically and horizontally, in successive stages, thereby
requiring constant designing, sculpting and supervising agencies.
Such agencies are hardly known from contemporary epigraphic
sources, as artists and craftsmen of ancient and medieval India
have generally remained anonymous. Their work may be de-
scribed as more of a collective art than one of individual artistic
expression.
IV
The present study brings forth certain interesting possibilities in
the directions of enquiry for an understanding of the processes
556 J Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
of urbanization and location of urban centres in medieval South
India. Four major criteria emerge as determinant factors in urban
development, leading to the evolution of four main categories
of urban centres. Initially, areas of urban activity may be looked
for among the clusters of brahmadeyas and devadanas forming
the nuclei of the core regions of early kingdoms.’*! Conscious
attempts to establish new political and administrative centres
such as Tanjavir and Gangaikondacolapuram, perhaps due to
their strategic location, would provide a second criterion for
identifying them. Kaficipuram and Madurai served as political
and administrative centres throughout South Indian history,
although their religious importance continued to be an under-
lying factor in keeping alive their urban character.
Sacred associations from very early times, providing special
sanctity to religious centres like Srirangam (T iruchirapalli dis-
trict), Chidambaram (South Arcot district) and Tirupati (now
in Andhra Pradesh), would form a third factor towards the
development of urban centres. An interesting sub-variety of such
sacred centres may also be recognized among the tantyars,'*
where urban activity was confined to the religious and economic
functions of the temples around which centres developed. A
number of smaller villages and rural settlements came to be
attached to them.
Trade and commercial activities, which were not the domin-
ant factor in the development of Kudamukku-Palaiyarai, would
represent the fourth criterion in locating urban centres like ports
and market towns, where their role in urban development would
be the dominant one. In such centres religious institutions were
established mainly to cater to the needs of the various com-
munities involved in such activity. An obvious example of this
group of urban centres would be the port of Nagappattinam,
where, apart from a Siva temple of some antiquity, a large
Buddhist whara came to be established in the eleventh century
AD, evidently to provide for the large population of Buddhist
traders, both indigenous and foreign. To this category of urban
centres one must add the virappattanas and erivirappattanas,
which were market towns protected by mercenary troops at-
tached to big trading guilds like the Nanadésis or Tiéai Ayi-
rattaiffiurruvar or the Ayyavole Five Hundred. Such centres
Imperial Power and Urban Growth 4 557
came up along major trade routes connecting different parts of
South India, and their emergence in Tamil Nadu may be dated
back to the tenth century aD, or not later than the reign of
Rajendra I (c ap 1014-44).'*
The above categorization of urban centres would show that
in most cases, while trade was a secondary factor, religious
activity was a dominant and persistent, though not necessarily
the sole, factor. For the sacred functions of a temple or a
brahmadeya should also be accompanied by major economic
activity, in situations where dense peasant settlements and in-
tensive agriculture permitted the mobilization of a large surplus.
It would seem that political factors hastened the processes of
urban development. Whereas their withdrawal inevitably led to
a diminution in the size and complexity of an urban centre,
the continuation and increase of religious activities helped to
retain its urban character. Trade and commercial activities could
be the main factor in the development of some urban centres;
yet even here the presence of religious institutions was a neces-
sary concomitant of the urban process.
References
1. The name Kumbhakonam appears for the first time in a record
of the Vijayanagar ruler Viripanna Udaiyar from the Saranga-
pani temple dated in S. 1307 (ap 1385). See 415 of 1954-5 (i.e.
inscription number 415 of the Annual Report on (South) Indian
Epigraphy for the year 1954-5). Kudam means pot and mukku is
spout or nose (also corner?) and hence Kumbha + Konam. But
kudam also denotes nagaram or town, according to an early Tamil
nigantu or lexicographic work called the Pingalandai of about the
eighth-ninth centuries ap (verse 3381). It is not clear whether this
work mentions kudam as a town in general or as a particular town.
Kuda in Tamil means a hollow or cavity. See Tamil Lexicon.
2. Tirunavukkaragar’s Tevaram, Tirumurai v and vi; Sambandar’s
Tevaram, Tirumurai 1 and m; Sundaramirti’s Tevdram, Tirumurai
vu. The Nandikkalambakam, a ninth century literary work, praises
the Pallava King Nandivarman III on his victory over Palaiyarai—
Padaiyaru saya Palatyarai venran, 1.€., he conquered Palaiyarai after
defeating six armies.
558 4 Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
3. Tiruvalamculi inscriptions—618 of 1902; S//, vu, 215; 626 of 1902;
SII, vii, 228; Muniydr inscription—610 of 1902; S//, vm, 207;
Tirunagésvaram inscription—214 of 1911 in 1911-12 (SI] = South
Indian Inscriptions).
Akananuru 60: 13; Narrinai 379: 7; Kudavayil may also be taken
literally as ‘western gate’. Akananuru 44 would, however, suggest
that it was a town. See N. Subrahmanian, Pre-Pallavan Tamil Index,
Madras, 1966, 282, 284.
Purananaru 74, colophon. Also Subrahmanian, Tamil Index, 284.
Kudavasal is a village south-east of Kumbhakonam, on the way
to Tiruvarur and Nagappattinam.
Pattinappalai, w. 27-8.
B.K. Gururaja Rao, The Megalithic Culture in South India, Mysore,
1972, 89. The present writer has also explored this region and,
collected some urn-burial remains with Black-and-Red Ware, now
lying in the museum of the Department of Ancient History and
Archaeology, University of Madras.
See the author’s ‘Archaeology and Tamil Literary Tradition’.
Puratattva, 1975-6, no. 8, 110ff.
‘The Vélvikkudi Copper Plates of Pandya Nedunjadaiyan’, in T.N.
Subrahmaniam (ed.), Ten Pandya Copper Plates, Madras, 1967, 1-18.
T.V. Mahalingam, Kasicipuram in Early South Indian History, Madras,
1969, 214.
. KA. Nilakanta Sastri, The Colas, Madras, 1975 (reprint), 105.
. Mahalingam, Kafcipuram, 171-2.
Nandtkkalambakam quoted in Palatyarait-talavaralaru, Palaiyarai
Devasthana Publications, 1957, 4.
. Nilakanta Sastri, The Colas, 110.
. Ibid., 105.
Ibid., 110.
265 of 1907; SII, m, 138; 189 of 1895; SII, v, 723: 20 of 1931;
SIT, xtx, 115.
SI, i, 99; T.N. Subramaniam (ed.), Thirty Pallava Copper Plates,
Madras, 1966, 205-36.
SH, tm, part 11, 91; xm, 13. The inscription referring to Kumara-
marttandapuram is dated in the reign of a Rajakésari identified
with Aditya I.
20. SH, m1, 72; v, 716, 721.
21. B. Stein, ‘The Segmentary State in South Indian History’, in R.
“ae Realm and Region in Traditional India, New Delhi, 1977,
able I.
Imperial Power and Urban Growth J 559
22. The author has located several other brahmadeya-devadanas men-
tioned in the inscriptions of the Kumbhakonam region. For
instance at least 30 brahmadeya-dévadanas are mentioned in the
inscriptions from Tiruvidaimarudur, Tiruvalamculi, Tirunages-
varam and Kumbhakonam apart from the earlier brahmadeyas of
the Pallava period.
23. Tevaram of Sambandar, Tirumurai |: verse 72; Tirunavukkarasar,
Tirumurai V1, verse 289.
24. Divyaprabandham: The seven dlvars who refer to Kudandai are
Piidam (70-97), Péey (30, 62), Tirumalisai (Nanmugan Tiruvan-
dadi, 36; Tiruccandaviruttam 56-67), Tirumangai (Tirumoli, I-1-2;
7; I-I-4; 1-4-1 etc.), Nammalvar (Tiruvay noli, 5-8), Pertyalvar
(Tirumoli, 1-6-2; 6-6) and Andal (Ndacctydr Tirumolt, 13-2).
ynt For example, the Nagésvara temple at Kudamukku, the Siva
temples at Tirunagésvaram, Tiruvalame ili, Tirukkaruugavur and
Tiruvidaimarudiar were rebuilt in stone in the early Cola period.
26. See Y. Subbarayalu, Political Geography of the Chola Country, Madras,
1973, Map 7, which is followed for madu divisions in this essay.
For the madus and karrams between Coleroon and Vadavaru, 1.¢.
around Kumbhakonam, mentioned in the present paper, see
Map 9 of this essay.
ai. The nadu seems to be basically an agrarian region, representing
a grouping of agricultural settlements whose formation was
influenced by natural factors conducive to agriculture. Each
group of such settlements probably consisted mostly of kinfolk,
i.e. a cohesive group of agricultural people and tied together by
marriage and blood relationships. See Y. Subbarayalu, Political
Geography, 33, 36.
28. Mahalingam ‘The Nagésvarasvami Temple, Kumbhakonam’, Jour
nal of Indian History, April 1967, vol. xty, part 1, no. 133, 20ff.
For a description of the architectural features of the vimana,
assignable to the early-Cola style. Some of the royal patrons are
portrayed in the sculptures on the vimana walls, and such portrait
sculptures belong to a rare series found mostly in early-Cola
temples. Ibid., Figures 8-17. Apart from the Cola royal family
(SII, m, 137; xix, 323), a gift of 138 cows and 100 kasu for two
lamps was made by the Pandya king Maranjadaiyan (Varaguna II—
accession AD 862)—13 of 1908; S//, xv, no. 8.
29. 230, 231 and 233 of 1911: S//, m, 200.
30. 226 of 1911: S//, m, 201; 225 of 1911: S//, m, 204; 245 of 1911:
SI, xx, 95; 234 A of 1911: SI, xix, 131.
31. 237 of 1911: SII, xix, 184; 247 of 1911: SI, xix, 96.
560 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
32: 248 of 1911: S//, xix, 50.
3: 246 of 1911: SII, xix, 431; 254 of 1911.
34. 243 of 1911: SI/, xix, 132; 244 of 1911: SII, xix, 133; 234 of 1911:
SII, xix, 205.
. 255 of 1911 (1911-12), part u, para 15.
228 of 1911: SI, 45; 236 of 1911: S//, xin, 108; 251 of 1911: S/I,
xix, 8; 229 of 1911: S//, m, 131; xix, 204.
247 of 1911: SII, xix, 96.
237 of 1911: SII, xix, 184; 247 of 1911: SII, xix, 96.
254 of 1911 (1911-12). The term kalanju may be taken to refer
usually to a weight and, occasionally, to a coin. Tulaippon, meaning
‘punched gold’, has been described as a piece of gold, ‘burnt, melted,
cooled and found current, i.e. neither wanting in purity nor in
weight’ (1911-12, part 1, para 21). This term occurs in the Nagéévara
temple, Tirunagésvaram and Tirukkarugavir inscriptions in addi-
tion to kalanju. Kasu is obviously a piece of metal (gold or copper)
of a particular weight and fabric. The term ilakkasu, which is also
common in the inscriptions of this area, may well be a silver coin
(‘lam = silver), although it has been interpreted as ‘Ceylon coin’
(idam = Ceylon). Hence the term ilakkarun-kasu (242 of 1907: SII,
xIx, 38) may also be taken as a ‘base silver’ coin.
40. W. Eliot, Coins of Southern India, Delhi, 1970, 152, G. No. 151.
R. Nagaswamy, ‘Madurantakan Madai’, Damilica I, 1970, 101ff.
Also C.H. Biddulph, Coins of the Cholas, Varanasi, 1968, part |,
Fig. 1, 40.
41.
255 of 1911.
42.
Nilakanta Sastri, The Colas, 153ff.
43.
245 of 1911.
44.
3 of 1915. The origin of this temple may, however, go back to
the early Cola times, for a much damaged inscription in ninth-
tenth century characters seems to record some grant for food
offerings to the same deity—299 of 1965-6.
45. 295 of 1927 of the 19th year of Kuldttunga III.
46. 296 of 1927; 301 of 1927; 299 of 1927; 294 of 1927.
47. 1926-7, 11, para 84. As a result of an enlargement of the Visnu
temple of Sarangapani, the additions made to the Visnu temple
took away a large portion of the precincts of the Séméévara
temple.
48. 255 of 1911 (1911-12), part un, para 15.
49, Divyaprabandham. Sce note 4.
50. 278 of 1964-5.
Imperial Power and Urban Growth / 561
51. 279 of 1964-5; P.R. Srinivasan, ‘Rare Sculptures from Kumbha-
konam’, Transactions of the Archaeological Society of South India,
1958-9, 35-6.
222 of 1911: SII, xm, 13. The nagarattar made provisions for the
renovation of the tiruccurralai (veranda) and gopura (gateway) of
the Miladudatyarpalli.
215 of 1911: SI/, xm, 197; 218 of 1911.
214 of 1911.
217 of 1911: 212 of 1911.
. 211 of 1911.
213 of 1911.
218 of 1911: 214 of 1911; The coin knewn as Rajéndra-solan
kau is also mentioned in an inscription of Rajéndra I—217 of
1911.
220 and 221 of 1911.
Tiruvalamculi is described as a part of Tirukkudamukku in
Pambar nadu in Uyyakkondar valanadu—633 of 1902; S//, vm,
234.
_ Lands in Tattangudi and Odiyankudi in Innambar nadu in
Rajéendrasimhavalanadu—624 of 1902: SI/, vin, 222.
624 A of 1902: SII, vin, 223; 620 of 1902: S//, vm, 217.
. 633 of 1902: SII, vm, 234.
. SII, vin, 222.
631 of 1902; SIJ, vm, 229.
629 of 1902; SII, vm, 229.
. 626 of 1902; SII, vim, 226; 628 of 1902; SII, vi, 228; 193 of 1927-8;
202, 203 and 205 of 1927-8.
. 211 of 1927-8.
192 of 1927-8: SII, xn, 223.
196 of 1927-8.
. 194 of 1927-8: SII, xu, 224.
. 627 of 1902: SII, vm, 227.
. 36 of 1910: S//, m, 100.
. 37 of 1910: S//, m, 110.
_ 38 of 1910: S//, m, 102. The Jayabhimatali mentioned here, of
which Nakkan Candiradevi was a servant or dancing girl, is also
referred to in a Tanjavir inscription—S//, 1, 292.
46 of 1910.
44 of 1910.
. 36 of 1910: SII, m, 100.
. 42 of 1910.
291 of 1927; 298 of 1965-6.
562 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Srinivasan, ‘Rare Sculptures’, 37-8. |
K. Nambi Arooran, Glimpses of Tamil Culture Based on the Pertya-
puranam, Madurai, 1977, 115.
. 415 of 1954-5.
. 420 of 1954-5.
293 of 1927 (1926-7). | | :
The matha is described as maha matha in which Govinda Diksita,
the pradhani of the king, built the datravasal (gateway) and
anantakalyanamandapa—290 of 1927 (1926-7); also 320 of 1955-6.
416 of 1954-5.
Mahamaham/Souvenir, Kumbhakonam, 1968. Article on the
temples in and around Kumbhakonam.
306 of 1965-6.
301 of 1965-6. Kandada1 is even today the name of an important
Sri Vaisnava family whose ritual status is equal to that ofr eligious
heads of the Sri Vaisnava sect.
. A Telugu Coda Copper plate grant of the period of Vijaya-
gandagopala (thirteenth century aD) records provisions made for
its maintenance, A-62 of 1956-7; Epigraphia Indica, xm, 194ff.
92. A-61 of 1956-7: Epigraphia Indica, xvi, 88ff.
. 318 and 319 of 1955-6.
94, The emergence of the two major divisions, the Vadakalai (north-
ern) and Tenkalai (southern), among the Vaisnavas with their
different lineages of heads and ritual practices, was, in the main,
a result of the incorporation of a large sadra element into the
Vaisnava fold, leading to the formation of the Tenkalai. The
Tenkalais insisted on the importance of the Tamil canonical
literature over the Sanskrit tradition, and the Vadakalai continued
to preserve the northern element in the Vaisnava organization.
Both the organizations vied with each other for religious suprem-
acy and royal patronage. The Vijayanagar rulers, most of whom
were followers of Vaisnavism, extended their largesses in equal
measure to both the sects. Kumbhakonam is still one of impor-
tant centres of the Vadakalai tradition. The precedence of the
non-brahmana element in religious organization can be seen
among the Saivas much earlier, for their mathas were headed by
non-brahmana teachers, and _ the Tiruccattimurram = (in
Pattisvaram) lineage of Saiva teachers, the ‘Mudaliyars’ as they
are called, established branches at various other centres in the
thirteenth century ap (see note 128).
The Sankaracarya mathas, which also began to proliferate in
the post-Cola period, represent another major preserve of the
Imperial Power and Urban Growth J 363
Sanskrit tradition. hes the Vadakalais and the followers of the
Sankara tradition stood for continuous ‘sanskritization’, while
the non-brahmana Saiva mathas and the Tenkalais cham- pioned
the Tamil tradition.
95. The Tevaram references and the Periya Puranam descriptions of
both Palaiyarai and Kudandai are clearly those of a big city. See
T.V. Mahalingam, ‘The Nagésvarasvami Temple, Kumbhako-
nam’, 19 and Palatydraittalavaralam, 1.
96. The site of Sdlamiligai, where trial excavations were conducted
both by the Archaeological Survey of India and the University
of Madras, has brought to light remains of early structures built
of well-sized brick measuring 16” x 11” x 3”.
32. The story of this conflict, as narrated by the Pertya Puranam,
accuses the Jains of having hidden the /inga and appropriated
the Vadatali, from where the local Cola ruler retrieved the /inga
at the instance of the saint Tirunavukkarasar and forced the
Jains to leave the centre. Tirunavukkarasar himself describes
Vadatali as full of Jains who practised false doctrines. K. Vel-
laivaranan, Panniru Tirumurai Varalam, part |, Annamalainagar,
1972, 235ff. :
98. This inscription mentions Arambhanandi, a Jain teacher of the
Tiyankudi (Dipankudi) palli in Inga(!) nadu—297 of 1965-6.
99. SII, v: 320; also K.V. Ramesh, Jaina Literature in Tamil, New
Delhi, 1974, 181.
100. Divyaprabandham, Pertya Tirumoll, v. 10.
101. Aru Ramanathan (ed.), Arupattu Muvar Katatkal, 1973, 2nd edn,
Madras, 73, 157ff.
102. A number of merchants from Nandipuram are known from the
early Céla inscriptions of Kudamukku, Tirukkarugavor, Tiru-
vidaimaruddr, Tiruvisalur and Tirukkodikkaval (31 of 1931; SII,
xi, 259).
103. K. Vellaivaranan, Panniru, 98.
104. The earliest inscriptions of the temple belong to the late Céla
period and date from about the middle of the twelfth century
AD. 265, 266, 267 and 270 of 1927 (1926-7). They record land
and money endowments.
105. 157 of 1908 (1908-9).
271 of 1927 (1926-7).
106.
107. 2 of 1915 (1914-15).
108. 524 to 528 of 1921 (1920-1).
109. 17 of 1908 (1907-8); 256 of 1927 (1926-7).
564 v4 Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
110. 24 of 1908 (1907-8). The image is now kept in the Tanjavur Art
Gallery.
111. The sculptures of this temple are a veritable treasurehouse of
Saiva iconography and include, among others, representations
of the stories of the Saiva mayanars as narrated in the twelfth
century Saiva hagiological work, the Periya Puranam. See 1919-20,
part i, for illustrations and descriptions. The Tribhuvanavires-
vara temple in Tribhuvanam (Map 10-5), built by Kulottun-
ga III, is similar in architectural design and sculptural style.
24 of 1908 (1907-8).
Fiz.
21 and 23 of 1908 (1907-8).
BES:
114. Ariyappadaiydr (also padaividu), Manappadaiyur, Puduppadai-
yur and Pampappadaiyar are four villages around Palaiyarai
representing the sites of the old cantonments, all located within
a radius of about two miles. Padaividu or padaiydr means a
place where an army is stationed.
115. 239 of 1907: SI, xm, 7.
116. Nilakanta Sastri, The Colas, 354ff.
lif: Ibid., 157.
118. SIT, 1, 66, 69 and 70.
ry. Tiruvalangadu copper plates, S//, m, part m, 205, Tamil text, Il.
6-8.
120. Smaller Leiden Grant, Epigraphia Indica, vol. xa, 268.
121. Nilakanta Sastri, The Colas, 318.
122. Ibid., 394.
123. 262 of 1927 (1926-7).
264 of 1927 (1926-7).
124.
125. 263 of 1927 (1926-7).
257 of 1927 (1926-7).
126,
127. 260 of 1927.
128. 261 of 1927.
129. The non-brahmana Saiva religious heads of these mathas and
their lineage are mentioned in the thirteenth-fourteenth century
inscriptions. 218, 392 and 586 of 1908; 1908, part 1, 104-5; 108
and 109 of 1911, part n, 75; 1915, part n, 113.
130. 199 of 1907: SI, xtx, 91: m, 124. The inscriptions of Nandivarman
III, believed to be kept in an underground cellar, were re-engraved
at the time of the reconstruction in stone by the early Célas.
131. SII, 11, 202; v, 716; xi, 270; xix, 91 etc.
132. SI], xi, 7.
133. 208 of 1907: SII, xix, 390; 261 of 1907 (1907-8) ete.
Imperial Power and Urban Growth / 565
. 132 of 1895: SII, m, 72; 228 and 257 of 1907; 148 of 1895: SII,
v, 772; SII, v, 719; 216 of 1907: SII, xm, 270: 244, 253 of 1907.
. 262 of 1907: SII, v, 717; 198 of 1907: SII, xix, 90; 193 of 1907:
SII, xix, 248; 147 of 1895: SII, v, 711.
. 147 of 1895: SII, v, 711; 219 of 1907: SII, xx, 162: 239 of 1907:
SII, xm, 7.
_ 253 of 1907 (1907-8).
_ 150 of 1895: SII, v, 714.
. 208 of 1907: SII, xix, 300.
. 154 of 1895: SII, v, 718; 214 of 1907: SI/, m, 202, 203; 233 and
306 of 1907.
. 221 of 1907: SII, xx, 344.
. 246-8 of 1907 (1907-8).
. 219 of 1907: SII, xx, 224; 279, 281 and 294 of 1907; 133 of
1895: SII, v, 697 and 698; 270 of 1907; 259 of 1907: SII, v, 701.
. B. Stein, ‘The State and the Agrarian Order’, in B. Stein (ed.),
Essays on South India, New Delhi, 1976, 80-8.
. Iam thankful to N. Sethuraman of Kumbhakonam for provid-
ing me with this map.
. This belief is strengthened by the fact that till recently copper
coins of the Célas could be purchased by the weight in the
vessel shops of Kumbhakonam.
. 71 of 1897: Nilakanta Sastri, The Colas, 595.
. A large co-operative association of weavers is located at Darasu-
ram.
. The bronzes under worship in the temples of Kumbhakonam
and other centres of this urban complex are mainly of the Cola
period, and occasionally their consecration is referred to in the
temple inscriptions.
150. The major groups are the royal family and the elite, represented
by the officers, vélams, leading véldlas, and caste groups like
brabmanas attached to various temples, religious groups like
Jains, Saivas and Vaisnavass, occupational groups like the Kai-
kkolas and manradis, and a host of other groups attached to the
temple in the capacity of tenants, temple servants, dancers,
musicians, drummers, etc. Even the Malaiyalar and Simhalas are
known to have been in residence in Tiruvalamculi and Tiru-
nagéesvaram respectively (215 of 1911: S//, xm, 197).
ISE Nuclear areas as relatively autonomous economic units, where
human and material resources were mobilized to satisfy not only
the basic requirements of subsistence, but also of sophisticated
366 J Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
and complex political, religious and social institutions, parti-
cularly in the Cola period, are highlighted by B. Stein in
‘Integration of the Agrarian System of South India’, in R.E.
Frykenberg (ed.), Land Control and Social Structure in India,
Wisconsin, 1969, 186ff.
132; Tantyur (tan-kuru) means a separate settlement or village. Several
such ftantyuérs are known to have been created mainly due to
their expanding economic activities. Quite a few of them, like
Tribhuvani (Pondicherry), Mannargudi (Tanjavur district) and
Chidambaram (South Arcot district), were centres of consider-
able importance, where urban development centred round the
local temples or an original brabmadeya. To such centres, many
smaller villages came to be attached as pidagais. See Y. Sub-
barayalu, Political Geography, 92-4.
153; M. Abraham, ‘The Ayyavole Guild of Early Medieval South
India’, M.Phil. Dissertation, Jawaharlal Nehru University, 1978,
App. A.
Imperial Power and Urban Growth / 367
KAVERI DELTA
Hinterland Of Kudamukku- Palaiyarai
TIRUMARAITUR W
fo~<
‘hates 4
‘
i MUDICHOLA NW
.
eh meow - ———
ANJAVUR K
VENN! K
Map 9: The Kaveri Delta - The Hinterland of
Kudamukku-Palatyarai
568 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
e
TANJAVUR
1 - KUDAMUKKU B- PALAIYARAI
2 - TIRUNAGESVARAM 14— PATTISVARAM
3-— TIRUVALAMCULI 1S— NANDANMEDU
4- TIRKKARUGAVUR %- SOLAMALIGAI
5 — TRIBHUVANAM 17- MULATYUR
6 — TIRUVIDAIMARUDUR 18— NANDIPURAM
7— TIRUPPURAMBIYAM 19- RAJARAJESVARAM
6 - TANDANTOTTAM 20— ARIYAPPADAIVEDU
9- TIRUNARAIYUR 21— PUDUPPADAIYUR
10 — KUDAVAYIL 72- PAMPAPPADAIYUR
11 - MUNIYUR 23- MANAPPADAIYUR
12- VELLAIVINAYAK ACATURVEDIMANGALAM
Map 10: Kudamukku-Palaiyarai - The Urban Core
ae:
a KM11ua:m pb hakonam
ii
me YW =
=e Ve. ay
a Ula ye
=e
s 2 Lay
KUMBAKONAM
ng
~
370 7 Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
q < :
N, "“f/
KUMBHAKO NAM A, ? Py PANDAMALLUR
1980 , ‘
Legend
—— ROAD
—— RAILWAY LINE
== RIVER
a
C SVAMIMALAL
To Tiruvaiyaru t
OLAMALIGA!, Bai aivARAl
PATTISVARAM <3
To Nannitam
Map 12: Kumbhakonam in 1980
Zz
The City and the Hinterland:
K adficipuram and Tondaimandalam
ab Kafncipuram and Madras represent two variants
of an urban process, a regional manifestation of the larger
processes of early medieval urbanization in the whole of the
subcontinent.' Their urbanism—form and meaning—needs to be
situated within a well-defined regional, historical and cultural
context, and can be best understood through the pursuit of urban
history as a processual change or development, 1.e., economic
diversification and social stratification, representing different
levels of systemic integration through coherent institutional
means. Such a regional context for Kaficipuram and Madras 1s
provided by Tondaimandalam, which was a politico-geographic
and cultural sub-region of the Tamil macro-region in the early
medieval period.
Cities like Kaficipuram in Tondaimandalam, Tafjavur in
Célamandalam and Madurai in Pandimandalam, were at once
products and symbols of a distinctive socio-political culture
which evolved through the centuries of Pallava-Pandya (sixth to
ninth centuries) and Cola (ninth to thirteenth centuries) rule,
representing two levels of systemic integration through forces,
which led to the emergence of institutions, i.e. organized in-
stitutional space, and established hierarchical relations of social
dominance. To the people of this cultural milieu, the city was
where these institutional developments were most conspicuous,
most clearly ordered and articulated.” Evidence of these develop-
ments, as also of the emergence of urban hierarchies, together
with typological categories of urban centres, is found in the rich
inscriptional records and the powerful bhakti (devotional) litera-
ture of the Pallava-Cola periods.
Peninsular India passed through two phases of urbanization
in the pre-Vijayanagar period, the early historic and the early
medieval, each distinct from the other.
372 if Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
It is the second urbanization, i.e. of the early medieval phase
(ap 600-1300) with which we are concerned here, the processes
being well and clearly reflected in the region of our study. Being
significantly different from the early historic urbanization, it
marks a processual change, i.e. an intelligible sequence of change,
rather than a result of an almost mystically “sudden impulse”
like that of the earlier phase.
The historian’s interest in processes and the sociologist’s
preoccupation with models supplement each other in studying
‘traditional’ and ‘modern’ (pre-industrial and ‘colonial and/or
industrial’) societies and the urban forms generated by them.
The model of the ‘orthogenetic’ and ‘heterogenetic’ cities pro-
posed by Robert Redfield and Milton Singer, and the closely
allied concept of the ceremonial centre, an orthogenetic form,
which has been admirably worked out by Paul Wheatley in his
study of the Chinese city of the second millennium BC, are most
interesting and useful from the point of view of ‘traditional’
societies.4
A variant of this model, with a neo-Weberian, comparative
civilizational approach, offers the alternative concept of the
processes of centrality and concentration, to analyze various
aspects of the urban phenomena, and to understand the char-
acter of the pre-modern city, by bringing together sociological,
anthropological and geographical perspectives.
Centrality has been defined as the process whereby the
symbolic and political centres of a society, through which it
transcends its daily routine of existence, are constructed and
crystallized. It implies the crystallization and symbolization in
a specially defined space and ecological setting, of the cultural,
political and moral order of a society and the domination of
a society by such a centre. The two most important charac-
teristics of the forces of centrality were the religious and
politico-administrative manifestations, that appeared sometimes
simultaneously. Concentration is the concentration of popula-
tion, usually as a result of demographic and economic processes
that lead to such concentration in a specific area, generating
processes of social differentiation and division of labour and
growing interaction between various groups, and the emergence
of crafts and services. In both processes, there are a number
The City and the Hinterland WA 573
of variations within the internal structure, in the extent and
intensity of socio-economic manifestations. A combination of
both processes may also occur.® The strong emphasis, in the
above concept, on cultural dimensions and the possibilities of
the transformation of forces of concentration into those of
centrality, are of special interest to our understanding of
medieval South Indian urbanization, and its applicability to
the cultural and regional context of Tondaimandalam, without,
however, going into its merits in cross-cultural comparisons
of urban phenomena, particularly the city.
Tondaimandalam : The Region
The concept of the mandalam was evolved by the Colas under
Rajaraja I (aD 985-1014) and was applied to the different
politico-cultural sub-regions of the Tamil country,’ unified
under Cola hegemony through common politico-cultural for-
mulae. Each of them, however, had a long historical past, and
retained, to a large extent, its distinctive character as a sub-
cultural zone. Hence, the urbanism of Kaficipuram to which
the Madras region was linked both politically and culturally,
needs to be discussed within the context of the urban con-
figurations of Tondaimandalam’, which forms a backdrop, as
it were, to the central role that Kaficipuram played. It is to
the processes of the urbanization of this region that one should
turn in order to explicate this role.
The name Tondaimandalam is used here to denote the older
region called Tondainadu, which was renamed Jayankonda-
colamandalam under Rajaraja I (ap 1001), when an officer called
Tondai nadu vagai Seida udaiyar surveyed and resettled Tondai-
nadu, making several additions to it to form Jayankondacola-
mandalam.* The latter region is important as a larger territorial
unit created by the will of a political authority for administrative
convenience. However, the heart of the pre-Cola cultural region,
dominated by the Pallavas, lay in Tondai nadu, i.e. the northern
parts, wherein Kaficipuram and Madras are located.
+ See Map 13, Tondaimandalam AD 1300—Urban Configurations
374 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
In geographic terms, Tondainadu 1s the region drained from
north to south by the Arni and Kortallaiyar rivers and the
Palar-Cheyyar-Veghavati rivers.” In historical-geographic terms,
it covers the area of the traditional twenty-four kdttams, now
represented by the Chingleput district, a major part of the North
Arcot district, the northernmost part of the South Arcot district,
and even parts of the Chittoor and Nellur districts, now in
Andhra Pradesh. Thus, the north-western portions of Tondai-
mandalam are represented by the ancient Bana chieftaincy of
Perumbanappadi and parts of Pangala-nadu located between
Perumbanappadi and another chieftaincy called Vanakoppadi
in the North Arcot district.
Tondai nadu, in the early historic phase, was marked largely
by tracts of relative isolation—kurici (hilly) and mullai (forest/
pastoral)—while the marudam (plains) and nettal (coastal/littoral)
eco-zones were confined to the Palar-Cheyyar valley, the extent
of which was in no way as significant as the Kaveri plains. They
could sustain only small communities or segmentary tribes’? in
small dispersed settlements. The descriptions of the region in
one of the Sangam works"' also points to large tracts of unsettled
land, forest and hilly regions, with few settlements and fewer still
of big ones (pérvr) like Kaficipuram and its port, Nirppeyarru.
The tradition recorded in the Tondaimandala-Satakam of the
twenty-four kottams and of the Kurumbar, a pastoral tribe, which
occupied them,’ is also indicative of an agriculturally less
developed region. The Megalithic remains, associated in popular
tradition and belief with this tribe,'? further points to the
pastoral-cum-agricultural organization of the proto-historic and
early historic cultures of the region. The kéttam as reflected in
the Pallava-Cola inscriptions, in fact, holds a clue to the rela-
tively small subsistence-oriented and dispersed nature of agricul-
tural settlements, pastoralism being the dominant occupation,
a feature which is also confirmed by the large number of cattle
raids recorded in the hero-stones of the North Arcot district
between the sixth and tenth centuries ap,'* and the predominant:
ly numerous gifts of cattle to the temples of the Pallava and
early-Cola periods, i.e. sixth to tenth centuries ap.
The integration of the kottams of Tondaimandalam under the
Pallavas marks the beginnings of early medieval urbanization in
The City and the Hinterland / 575
the region, the chief instruments of integration being the brab-
madeya or brahman settlement and the temple, which turned the
subsistence-level agricultural settlements into surplus-oriented
ones (ar), grouped into mddus within the kottams. Thus, the
kottam and the nddu emerged as viable socio-economic and polit-
ical units only in relation to the new ruling families (Pallavas)
and the landed elite, i.e. the brahmanas and superior velalas
(agricultural community) of the seventh to ninth centuries.'°
The brahmadeya ard the temple were products of brahmanical
ideology. Sponsored and promoted by the ruling families claim-
ing ksatriya status and divine descent, they developed into
institutions of substantial political power and social dominance
with economic privileges, as demonstrated by most studies.'®
While it is hard to spell out in precise empirical terms the
nature of the economic advantages to the rulers who sought to
establish their sovereignty through them,"’ there is little doubt,
however, that they led to a more intensive organization of
production, geared to support large populations in brahmadeya
and temple centres. The real advantage lay in integrating older
settlements and non-brahmadeya villages (ar) into the new agrar-
ian system and bringing virgin land under cultivation (both
waste and forest). Examples of several pre-existing settlements
being clubbed together into a new brahmadeya are also known.'®
The process was spread over three phases, continuing well
into the Cola period. The initial phase is marked by the
brahmadeya as the chief integrative force, and in the second
phase, i.e. ninth to tenth centuries, the temple assumed a major
role. The third phase represents the culmination of the process
in the eleventh century, the revenue assessment and reorganiza-
tion of revenue units under Rajaraja I (ap 1003)'? marking the
height of political and ideological levels of integration and the
emergence of a distinctive socio-political culture.
Under the Pallavas, i.e. seventh to eighth centuries, agrarian
expansion through brahmadeyas took place in certain key areas
in the Palar-Cheyyar valleys, invariably accompanied by irriga-
tion works (tataka = reservoir or éri = lake), the region around
Kaficipuram receiving greater attention. By mid-ninth century,
Pallava brahmadeyas had come into existence in six kottams. Most
of them remained predominantly rural/agrarian centres, while
376 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
some, at a later stage, developed into nuclei of urban activities.
In the second half of the ninth century, Pallava rulers like
Nrpatunga and Kampavarman, whose period coincided with the
rise of Cola power under Vijayalaya and Aditya I, initiated
several irrigation works, which were later elaborated or improved
under the early Cola king Parantaka I (907-55), when new
irrigation works appeared in almost every kottam, and existing
ones were augmented with a simultaneous increase in nadus
within the kottams. Elaborate arrangements for their upkeep by
sabhas or brahmana assemblies, provision for maintenance and
management by wartyams (committees) construction of tambu
(sluice), waste weir and channels, desilting and repair, become
important details in the Pallava-Cola inscriptions. Demarcation
of boundaries of land, ownership or enjoyment rights, nature
and category of land, and the number of crops to be raised, are
invariably and increasingly recorded.2° Thus, it was not a case
of mere demographic growth and extension of cultivated area,
but a restructuring of the agrarian economy through large-scale
irrigation works and effective management of resources, which
was indeed the very key to the difference in the farming societies
of the early (Sangam) and the later (Pallava-Cola) periods. For,
viewed in their geographical and ecological setting, the brah
madeya and the temple may be seen as harbingers of advance
farming methods such as irrigation technology and seasonal
regulation of the cultivation process through proper manage-
ment of resources.
In this process, construction of large-scale reservoirs begun
by the Pallavas and continued under the Célas would hence
appear to be a major factor in agrarian expansion. Interestingly,
there is a general correspondence between the steady increase in
irrigation works mentioned in the inscriptions of the seventh
to eleventh centuries and the increase in the nadus during the
same period.
At least a minimum of seventy-two nadus are known to have
had at least one important irrigation source each.
The correlation is particularly striking in the period of
Parantaka I (907-55), with new nadu units appearing for the
first time in inscriptions, a phenomenon common to all the
Cola dominated regions.?! This was the foundation on which
The City and the Hinterland / 377
the restructuring of the economy reached its culmination under
the middle Cola ruler Rajaraja I and Rajendra I, creating an
extensive resource base in the river valleys and a widening
agricultural hinterland for Kafcipuram. As a major centre of
urban concentration, Kaficipuram’s economic reach in the
twelfth century AD covered all the nddus of the Palar-Cheyyar
valleys and even beyond.
Distribution ofT rrigation Works and Nadus (ap)
7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th
Century Century Century _—C entury Century Century
a ee
3 nadus 2 nadus 17 nddus 30 nadus 12 nddus 8 nadus
one in one in + + + +
each each
3 kottams 2 kottams in 6 in 11 in 8 in 3
kottams kottams kottams _—kottams
2Hiais 2+ 16+ 30+ 9+ 8(?)
irrigation irrigation irrigation irrigation irrigation irrigation
works works works works works works
The organization of agrarian relations around the brahmadeya
and the temple led to the emergence of the brahmana (priestly
caste), vélala (non-brahmana) landowners and the temple, ad-
ministered by brahmanas and velalas as landed elite and to a
re-structuring of society within the varna or caste framework,
the regional specificities of the Tamil country producing a
variant of the caste system, which was expressed through two
broad categories, the brahmana and non-brahmana or sudra.
Within the second category, most of the occupational and
service groups (jatis) were placed. Social differentiation through
diversification of economic activities and occupational differen-
ces in the form of different categories of temple functionaries,
craftsmen in the service of agriculture and agricultural labourers,
ie. division of labour, was interwoven in this process.
With the gradual expansion of the exchange nexus among
the agricultural settlements within the nddus and the revival of
578 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
long-distance trade by the ninth century aD, another important
dimension to the complexity of societal organization was added,
viz., the nagarattar or a full-fledged trading community. The
nagaram™ came to be the third major institutional force, the
nagarattar controlling local and intra-regional trade.
Puranic religion and the bhakti cult provided the ideological
premises and the institutional means, i.e. the temple, to create
effective space—rural and urban—for the emerging complexity
of social organization.”? In the medieval South Indian context
all the emergent groups—rural and urban—were merged into a
single systemic relationship, as substantial components within
the same structure, ‘seeking validation within the norms of a
traditional social order’. The acts of validation mainly centered
round the temple, its construction, participation in gift-giving
and ritual activities in a ranked hierarchy.
Urban nuclei: 1. Tan-Karu
By the tenth to eleventh centuries, urban nuclei emerged in
the major brahmadeyas and temple centres, which were mainly
royal creations, located near large irrigation projects. Such
brahmadeyas came to be organized as separate revenue units
and designated as tan-kuruv*’ and later as tani-ur (independent
unit). In terms of revenue administration, the tan-kuru is
comparable to the wala-nadu, a larger revenue unit, comprising
of several nadus created in the eleventh century by Rayaraja I.
While the valanadu organization dominated the Cola heartland
and newly conquered chieftaincies in Naduvil nadu and Pandi
nadu,” tan-kurus were more numerous and more systematically
introduced in Tondai-nadu and a few areas south of it, but
rarely in Cola nadu proper.”® The vala-nddu nomenclature was
used occasionally for the kottams in Tondai nadu.”’
_ The tan-karu increased in size and population with the addi-
tion of several pidagai (hamlets) and puram (full fledged revenue
village) as devadanas or grants to temples between the tenth and
twelfth centuries. This is also Suggestive of a defining and
redefining of economic and socio-political units within the
kottam, for when older brahmadeyas became taniyars under the
Colas, their nadu affiliation ceased to operate and their kottam
The City and the Hinterland / 579
location alone is mentioned, as also in the case of newly-created
taniyurs. Such restructuring would also seem to be an act of
deliberate royal policy for creating agencies of a state synthesis
under the Colas. In effect, it introduced a virtual hierarchy among
brahmadeyas and different levels of urbanization, the tanzyurs
being capable of widening the orbit of their economic functions,
with markets developing within and attracting traders from
outside, a nagaram sometimes being attached to them or created
for them, taxes assessed independently and direct links established
with the king’s government.
The tantyars show a distinct pattern of socio-political domin-
ance, economic and administrative functions with a higher status
than other brahmadeyas and temple centres. Members of the
royal family bestowed special attention on them, extending their
direct patronage to temples, closely interacting with the local
elite and priestly groups in the socio-religious sphere, with a
direct politico-economic control. Temples in the tantyur were
invariably royal foundations. The tantyars were named and
renamed after the founder kings and their successors.” More
importantly, they were internally so structured as to have several
céris or quarters demarcated for elite groups in the centre of the
inner square (main streets around the temple), for professional
groups in the immediate neighbourhood (i.e. outer square), and
for those at the fringes of society in the outskirts. The certs were
also named either after royal members (Madurantakam) or after
the patron deity (Uttaramerur).” The main roads and markets
(perangadi and angadi—big and small markets) were also similarly
named! The markets, which were located at central points,
where commerce was a regular activity, attracted traders from
managarams \ike Kaficipuram and royal ports like Mamalla-
puram, as well as from the distant Cola and Pandya regions.
Highways linked them to other nagarams, managarams and to
royal centres.?2 The standard weights and measures used in the
taniyur were often those prevalent in royal centres, ¢.g. Kafici-
puram.? Monetary transactions are also found to be more
frequent in these centres. Land owning elite from other regions
also figure as donors in the tamiyurs.
Social dominance in these centres was expressed through the
construction of the temple and its precincts with subsidiary
38o v4 Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
shrines, as well as by the nature and volume of endowments.
The main shrine (vimana) was invariably a royal foundation or,
occasionally, the work of chiefly families** like the Banas in
Tondai nadu. Additional shrines and structures were built by
officers and dignitaries like the Mavénda véelar.®
The Taniyar acted as an information channel, especially for
royal orders. Rules regarding the organization of the sabha and
its functioning through elected variyams (committees) are re-
corded in such centres.** More importantly, royal orders relating
to defaulters of land revenue affecting the whole region or several
regions, were invariably recorded and publicized through these
centres.” The high visibility of royal officers, civil and military,
both as donors and officials discharging executive functions,
convening the sabha and executing royal orders, is another
notable feature indicating the central place functions of the
tanyyur. A similar role 1s also recognizable in the late-Cola and
post-Cola periods, i.e. thirteenth-fourteenth centuries, when the
Telugu Colas, Pandyas and Sambhuvaryas chose to record their
orders relating to refixing, remission or revision of taxes on
traders, weavers, oil-mongers and other professional groups in
the same taniyars as well as nagarams.**
Major craft production centres like weaving centres, centres
of oil production and salt manufacture, were often attached
as devadanas to the taniyurs, and it is of great significance that
such centres were sometimes located in other kottams or at
considerable distances.” A combination of the taniyar and
nagaram is illustrated by Tirukkalukkunram, a magaram in
Kalattur Kottam, which was linked to Vanavanmahadevicatur-
véedimangalam, a tan-karu in Amir Kottam in the eleventh
century AD.” Taniyurs inevitably became multi-temple centres
of more than one or two religious affiliations. Each of these
components was structured on the same pattern, showing a
general concentration of population, sometimes covering an
area of five or six square kilometres and more.
The evolution of the tirumadai vilagam, i.e. the temple square
with house sites and streets aligned at right angles, is con-
spicuously illustrated in the tamiyar.* Temple priests (Siva-
brahmanas and Vaikhanasas), uvaccar or musicians and lapasvins
(ascetics), resided in the inner square as also the landed elite,
The City and the Hinterland / 3581
while professional communities like weavers, oil-mongers and
devaradiyar (temple servants) were permitted to settle down in
the outer premises, and areas were set aside for mixed castes
known as the Sankarappadi, showing the careful demarcation of
effective space in these centres. Mathas (monasteries) of various
lineages, Saiva and Vaisnava, which were attached to the temples,
were accommodated as a major component in the temple
precincts” even from the twelfth century, contributing to the
increase in urban activities of these centres.
The horizontal stratification of residential areas in the ‘pre-
industrial’ city characterized as a ceremonial centre has been
referred to earlier.*? Here the ceremonial centre is so planned as
to align the city with cosmic structures and forces, where the
elite lived at the centre and the others at the margins. Markets
were neither central nor dominant, but a product of the demands
arising from the nucleation by the ceremonial centre. The tanz-
yur would seem to represent a smaller and less compact version
of such a centre, and cities like Kaficipuram, the enlarged version.
The taniyar is also a supreme example of rural-urban continuum.
It is hard to find evidence of a tantyur in each kéttam, but
its emergence in key areas, and the distribution of tantyurs in
ten kottams (so far identified) would perhaps indicate the pos-
sibility of their occurrence in the ratio of at least one to a
kottam. This, together with the fact that some chiefly centres
like Tiruvallam* also became a taniyar under Rajaraja I, is a
feature of considerable importance in revenue administration
and political linkages.
Urban nuclei: 2. Nagaram or Market Centre
The urban forms generated by the end of Pallava rule, i.e. ninth
century AD, found expression only in two categories of centres,
the royal or administrative centre, and the market or commercial
centre. As Kaficipuram, apart from being a royal centre, was also
a major commercial centre in the expanding trade network under
the Colas, it is the magaram or market centre, which is of
immediate concern here. Commerce in the Pallava period was
organized around Kaficipuram, the capital and Mamallapuram,
the royal port. The other Pallava nagarams (four) were located at
582 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
nodal points linking the capital with other regions, particularly
the Kaveri Valley. The distribution of nagarams in the seventh
to ninth centuries does not show any direct correlation with the
kottams or nadus reflective of a town-hinterland relationship or
that of a market to its marketing areas.” The exchange nexus,
in other words, was oriented more towards the commercial needs
of the royal centre and less as a regular market for each agrarian
unit.
The proliferation of the xagaram from the tenth century
shows that the need for marketing facilities increased with the
agrarian expansion of the seventh to ninth centuries. Its dis-
tribution pattern shows a steady increase in the early Cola
period, a remarkable increase in the middle Cola period, and a
marginal increase in the late Cola period, keeping pace with the
rise, expansion and decline of Cola power.** As a local body,
the nagaram maintained local markets (amgadi), supervising the
flow of goods, providing a regular link among the nadus and
with itinerant traders.’” There is some indication that each of
the twenty-four kottams of Tondai nadu ultimately acquired at
least one magaram, for a late Cola inscription from Tirukkaccur®
refers, among other things, to the twenty-four magarams of the
region and the Vaniyar or oil-mongers, who met in Kafcipuram
to make decisions regarding certain levies on oil mills to be
endowed to the Tirukkaccir Siva temple.
In the tenth and eleventh centuries, a further diversification
in markets and trading pattern is attested to by the emergence
of specialized trading groups like the Saliya magaram (weaver-
traders). Sankarappadi nagaram (supplies of oil and ghee) and
the Vaniya nagaram (oil mongers).*”
The role of the nagarams in the commerce of Tondai nadu
and inter-regional trade was significant, reflecting to a great
degree the level of monetization in the Cola period. The volume
of gold deposits and gifts to the temple was considerably larger
in the early Cola period (the reign of Parantaka I and Uttama
Cola, 1.e. the tenth century), when compared to the Pallava
period, while gold and money gifts show an increase in the
period of Rajaraja I and Rajendra I (985-1044). In Kulottunga’s
reign (1070-1118), due to the royal policy of encouraging trade
through abolition of tolls and the extension of trade ventures
The City and the Hinterland / 383
~
into all conceivable areas in South India, Southeast Asia and
China, a more regular use of money 1s attested to by the constant
inscriptional references to coins, as well as by the issue of a new
currency by Kuldttunga I, modelled on the gold issues of the
Eastern Calukyas.5! These would show not only a quantitative
increase, but also a higher level of monetization, as interest rates
were now calculated in terms of money and differentiation was
made between old currency in use and new ones as legal tender.
After a temporary lull under the successors of Kulottunga I,
new currencies came into use in Tondai nadu with the coin
issues of the Telugu Colas (Nellar Pudu Madai, Gandagopalan-
madai) and the Pandyas in the thirteenth century aD.” Land
prices show an upward trend® in the late Cola period (1150-
1279) and commodity production went up, considerably en-
hancing the economic status of traders. However, the level of
monetization under the Célas was, on the whole, considerably
low when compared to the Vijayanagar period, and its impact
on rural exchange was minimal.
The outward flow of the gold and money deposits from the
nagarams to the hinterland is attested to by the fact that they
were entrusted to the sabhas and urs of the hinterland, bringing
in a reciprocal flow of interest in paddy, ghee and other ritual
requirements to the nagaram and mdanagaram temples. While
initially the rates of interest were in kind,* money interests
became regular from the period of Kuldttunga I.”
Individual merchants show a great deal of mobility between
different regions (mandalams) from the early Cola period, as
seen from the references to Mayilattis and Cettis travelling from
Céla and Pandya regions to the Tondat nadu nagarams and
making individual donations to temples.** However, it was
through collective action and patronage, as well as supportive
political roles, as in Kafcipuram, that the merchant class estab-
lished its social prestige and economic status in the early and
middle Cola periods.
Itinerant trade and its organization
With the increase in peninsular trade and the revival and
expansion of South Asian trade, commercial pentgres came to
584 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
be organized and conducted by larger trading groups (samaya),
usually described as guilds or corporations, like Ayyavole or
Tisai Ayirattu Ainnurruvar, Nanadesi and Valanjiyar, the Mani-
eramam (local traders) and Axjuvannam (foreign traders). The
last mentioned was active only in the coastal areas of Tondai-
mandalam,”’ whereas in the Cola, Kongu and Pandya regions,
the Manigramam controlled prestigious markets in Kavérippum-
pattinam, Uratyur and Kodumbalir, showing greater mobility
in the commercially important link areas like the Pudukkottai
region.°®
The interaction of these merchant bodies with the nagarams,
some of which were intersection points in itinerant trade, was
a factor of great importance in early medieval urbanization,
especially due to the Cola policy of encouragement to overseas
trade, through trade missions, maritime expeditions and aboli-
tion of tolls, which facilitated their movement both inland and
overseas. Protected merchant towns called erivirappattanas were
established under royal charters from the eleventh century AD,
such towns appearing on trade routes, commercially important
areas and distribution points. Kattur in the Chingleput district
(near Madras) and Basinikonda (Siravalli) in the Chittoor dis-
trict were two such centres of the eleventh century in Tondai-
nadu.” The Nanddesis of Mayilappir formulated rules of
conduct for the traders and controlled Kattur, which they were
instrumental in converting into a protected merchant town.
The itinerant merchant body is less conspicuous in the capitals
(royal centres) and ports, which were managarams, where it is
visible only in the Capacity of a trader or donor extending
patronage to temples or setting up mathas as in Kafcipuram,”
but hardly exercised any political or social influence. Here, the
local managaram or nagaram organization wielded enormous
socio-political influence as administrators of commercial ven-
tures, patrons and managers of local temples," i.e. as high prestige
groups, in the hierarchy of local relations of dominance. In
Tondaimandalam, this merchant body does not appear to have
had temporary or permanent residential quarters in major centres
as in Colamandalam and Pandimandalam,® except presumably
in the erivirappattanas or in coastal towns like Mayilappir, which
was not a royal port.
The City and the Hinterland fy 385
By the end of the eleventh century, i.e. the reign of Kulo-
ttunga I, whose interests in promoting trade are well known, the
whole coastal region (later called Coromandel) from the Pandya
coast in the south to Visakhapattinam® in the north (Andhra
region), came to be linked through itinerant trade and, perhaps,
also by coastal shipping and coastal land routes. The Tondai-
mandalam coast, henceforth, assumed great importance, as seen
in the series of coastal trading centres appearing between the
twelfth and fourteenth centuries, from Tiruppalaivanam (Pulicat)
in the north to Marakkanam in the south.”
Trade, Craft Production and Matha
Nagaram and craft-production centres provide interesting con-
textual evidence, which would indicate a close relationship be-
tween the increase in trade activities, craft-production—especially
oil and textiles—and the institution of Saiva mathas (monasteries)
of various sects and lineages, starting from the Kalamukha
(Pasupata) mathas of the ninth and tenth centuries in centres like
Mayilappur and Tiruvorriyur® (the Madras region), the bhakti
mathas named after Saiva saints in the eleventh and twelfth
centuries, and the well organized mathas of the Golla/Golaki
or Laksadhyayi lineages of the twelfth to fourteenth centuries
AD, tracing descent from the Golla matha of Varanasi (Banaras).
They are invariably located in trade and craft centres. Itinerant
traders are also often found to be patrons of mathas, some of
which are named after them as Nanadesi, Valanjtya and Dan-
madavala matha.“ The monastic network seems to have provided
a great impetus to trade and craft production in Tondaimanda-
lam, as in other parts of Tamil Nadu.
South Indian textiles had a growing demand and widening
market in the medieval period, and, hence, the weaver com-
munities of Tondaimandalam (especially of the Kaficipuram
region) acquired a special importance in the commerce of this
region. The saliyas (pattasalin) and the karkkolas were two weaver
communities producing varieties of silk and cotton cloth for
inland and overseas markets. The saliyas gained considerable
influence in Kaficipuram, as the chosen weavers of royal gar-
ments and temple administrators from the tenth century AD,”
586 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
while the kaikkolas, the larger community, are not visible as an
influential group till the twelfth century AD. Early records refer
to them more often as warriors, some of them with high ranks
as commanders (sénapatis) and chiefs (mudalis), participating in
gift-giving activities.” The kazkkolas without such status titles
were apparently weavers who had no economic influence, being
dependent on traders for organizing the marketing of textiles.
However, by the twelfth century aD, the kazkkolas are seen making
expensive gifts like jewels, land, etc., the volume of gifts indicat-
ing an enhanced economic status, which ultimately gave them
avenues of upward social mobility through temple management
as trustees of endowments and members of the temple execu-
tive.”' Their aspirations to higher status took different forms of
seeking validation—through setting up images and dedicating
members of their family as devaradiyar (temple servants and
perhaps also dancing girls), to whom house sites were allotted
or sold in the thirteenth century in the tirumadaivilagam of the
temple.” Their status, both ritually and socially, was lesser than
the merchants or Saliya nagaram, though they were also entitled
to temple honours in the later period.
The change in their economic status, however, was also
accompanied by increase in taxes on weavers and their looms,”3
a feature noticeable even from the period of Kuldttunga I, which
led to severe tax burdens, forcing the weavers to abandon various
centres. They were induced to stay on or return by remission
or revision of taxes under the Sambhuvarayas and Pandyas in
the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries.” This became one of
the major issues in the Vijayanagar period, when the demand
for South Indian textiles was on the increase.
The interdependence of trade and craft is further emphasised
in the records of the same period, when collective gifts through
voluntary levies were made by merchants and weavers. Mer-
chants, weavers, oil-mongers and other professional groups are
increasingly mentioned together in the thirteenth and fourteenth
centuries, in magaram and craft centres, where such remissions
or revisions of taxes were recorded.
The twelfth century innovation in societal organization,
which helped to accommodate the craft groups, artisans, as well
as lower categories of agricultural workers, within the vertical
The City and the Hinterland / 387
division of the Right and Left Hand (Valanga: and Idangai)
castes,’> is not recorded in the Tondaimandalam inscriptions
till the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries AD. Presumably, this
division was known, as seen in the assignment of Right Hand
status to sdliyas and Left Hand status to the katkkolas,’”® which
points to the fact that criteria other than occupation played an
important part in such classification, traceable to their economic
and political influence even in the early Cola period.” Status
enhancement was achieved only through upward ritual mobility.
Even the Right and Left Hand division introduced only a new
basis, ‘a root paradigm’ for caste grouping, but still functioned
within the traditional norms of validation, i.e. temple ritual and
social privileges through such ranking.
Kaikkéla aspirations to enhanced ritual status were thus
confined, in the later period, to attempts to be upgraded within
this ‘root paradigm’ from the Left to the Right Hand. Right
and Left Hand caste rivalries, however, became a regular feature
only in the Vijayanagar and post-Vijayanagar periods.
Supra-local Organizations
An organization of agriculturists known as the Cittirameli
Periyanadu appears in inscriptional records of Tondaimandalam
from the middle of the eleventh century aD in the reign of
Rajendra Cola II (1052-1064).” It has often been described as
a Periya nadu (larger nadu) assembly formed by the nattar
(vélalas) to resist the centralizing efforts of the Colas.” It would
appear, however, that the need for such an organization was
created more by the growing consumption of food grains and
pulses in urban areas and the efforts of agriculturists to control
the movement of grains and other agricultural products, which
they alone could have mobilized for exchange with itinerant
traders. A more logical assumption would be that it was an
agricultural guild,® which established commercial links with
the Five Hundred by the twelfth century ab. A close interaction
between these organizations is indicated by the presence of the
Tisai Ayirattu Ainnurruvar or Nanddesi in centres where the
Cittirameli inscriptions are found, either mentioned separately
as in Tamaraippakkam (North Arcot district),®’ or as jointly
388 J Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
making donations in other parts of Tamil Nadu, particularly
in the commercially important Pudukkottai-Ramanathapuram
region, and in the Cola heartland.” .
On the basis of the earliest occurrence and the spatial and
chronological distribution of the Cuttirameli inscriptions, it
would be tempting to assign the origins of this organization
to the conscious efforts of the Tondainadu agriculturists, later
spreading to other parts of the Tamil country, and even into
South Karnataka and Andhra. In Tamaraippakkam, the
nattar of several kottams and other areas included in Jayakonda-
colamandalam, assembled to discuss common problems of the
vélala community. Yet, the prasasti of this organization, which
is an illuminating record, shows that its members, who claimed
to be Bhumiputras, were drawn from all the four varnas and
that it was not a caste organization. It also appears to have
had greater stakes in local relations of dominance than other
supra-local bodies, for it acted as a dispenser of justice, settling
land disputes and cases of criminal offence.® Later, in the
twelfth and thirteenth centuries, the Cittiraméli exercised the
right of fixing cesses and tolls on merchandise passing through
distribution points and coastal towns of Tondaimandalam,
jointly with the Five Hundred and other bodies like the
Vantya nagaram,™ at the time of the decline of Cdla power,
and in the post-Cola period.
The pre-fix Padinenbhumi and/or Elupattonpadu nadu (eighteen
countries and/or seventy-nine mddus) is also used to designate
this organization, as well as the Vaniya and Vaisya organizations
in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries.®> It is not easy to
define the geographical region covered by this description, and
presumably, the ‘eighteen countries’ had become a traditional
nomenclature for the whole of South India, although the ‘seventy-
nine nadus’ could originally have referred only to Tondaiman-
dalam.*
The Cittiraméli’s importance is further confirmed by the fact
that it founded brahmadeyas, pattanams and built temples, apart
from consecrating images and even dedicating temple servants,
including dancing girls.*’
The common eulogy of the Cittiraméli and merchant bodies
represents the first institutional expression of the ascendancy of
The City and the Hinterland / 589
traders in the predominantly agrarian set up. This is reiterated
by the coming together of magaram or Vaisya organizations and
Cittiraméli for various purposes, including fixing tolls and cesses
(maganmat), commission or share of the town (pattanappagudt),
conspicuously towards the close of the Cola period, when royal
authority became virtually ineffective in the peripheral regions
like Tondaimandalam, and receded to the core area, and also
in the post-Céla period, when new chieftaincies like the Telugu
Célas and Sambhuvarayas emerged in Tondaimandalam, and
found it profitable to encourage their autonomy and movement.
These chieftaincies extended special concessions® and support
to merchant organizations and also migrant traders from the
Cola heartland, residing in the coastal towns of Tondaiman-
dalam.” Kerala merchants trading in Kaficipuram and other
nagarams, and the Nellur traders who constantly moved into
Tondaimandalam with the ascendancy of Telugu Colas over
Kaficipuram in the thirteenth century, conducted active com-
merce in this region, and even identified themselves with the
larger trading community of Tondaimandalam by making joint
endowments to temples and participating in temple construc-
tion.”
In the thirteenth century, yet another supra-local forum
emerged in Tondaimandalam, when the Tiruvayppad: Nattavar
(cattle keepers/shepherds) of the “eighteen countries’, assembled
at Tiruvattiyar near Kaficipuram and assigned a voluntary levy
of cattle and sheep to the local temple for favours received by
their ‘caste’ and ‘clan’(?).”! In their eulogy, they called themselves,
significantly, Nandaputras of the Yadava lineage, descendants
of the lord of Dvaraka, i.e. Krsna, settled in Tondaimandalam.
This appears to be a unique organization of the pastoral families
of Tondaimandalam.
K aficipuram in the Early Historic Phase
Kafici, the
Kaficipuram/Kaficimanagaram of the early medieval
period, was one of the restricted loci of major urban con-
centration in the early centuries of the Christian era, with
access to maritime trade through its port Nirppeyarru, which,
on the basis of archaeological evidence, may be identified with
390 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Vasavasamudram near Vayalur, at the mouth of the Palar.”
Tiraiyar (people of the waves), the name of the early rulers of
Kacci, would suggest a possible association with the sea and
sea-faring, and indicate their interest in trading ventures over-
seas and in establishing socio-political dominance through
control over external trade. Like the other Tamil powers such
as the Colas, Céras and Pandyas, the Tiratyar encouraged the
flow of luxury goods, and founded dual centres of power—
Kaficipuram (Kacci) and its port—as a consumption point in
the interior and a port on the coast. Kafici was, however, more
than a mere consumption point, for it was the major weaving
centre in Tondaimandalam, being located in one of the cotton
producing regions, like Uraiyar in Colanadu and Madurai in
Pandinadu.
The antiquity of Kaficipuram’s commerce and external trade
is also established by archaeological evidence in the form of
remains of Roman pottery and the ‘ship’ type coins of the
Satavahanas (first and second centuries AD), and on the basis
of early Chinese references to Houang-tche and its trade.”
Evidence of its urban character is also provided by the Mani-
mekalat,”” a Buddhist work of the post-Sangam period, whose
locale was Kaficipuram, and by its description as a mdna-
Saram (big city) in all subsequent literary works and inscriptions.
Its status as a mdnagaram was enhanced by the multiple roles
that it acquired by the time of the rise of the Simhavisnu line
of Pallavas in the sixth century AD, as a royal centre, as well as
a commercial and craft centre, with a heterogeneous population
composed of Buddhists, Jains and followers of the brahmanical
religions of Vaisnavism and Saivism. Its continuous importance
in inter-regional trade was sustained even in the period of crisis
following the decline of Roman and West Asian trade, when
Kajfici revitalized its commerceby turning to Southeast Asia,
where Indianized kingdoms and colonies had emerged by the
fourth and fifth centuries ap. By the sixth century Mamal-
lapuram had also developed as the major outlet for Kafci-
puram’s trade,
Kafici’s early Buddhist connections” are attested to not only
by the Manimekalai, but also by the seventh century accounts
of Hsuan Tsang” and the Mattavilasa Prahasana,* the Sanskrit
The City and the Hinterland x 391
farce of Mahendravarman I, the Pallava ruler (575-630). The
Jain associations of Kanci are at least as old as AD 550, the date
of the Pallankoyil copper plates of Simhavarman,” referring to
Jina-Kanici or Tirupparuttikkunram and its Jain temple. Above
all, Kafici’s associations with Vedic brahmanism and Puranic
religion are of greater antiquity, and date back to the second
century AD, the probable date of Perumpanarruppatat, a Sangam
work, referring to Kafici. The Ghatika of Kaifici, a brahmanical
institution of higher learning referred to in the copper plates
and inscriptions of the Pallavas and Kadambas,'” also pro-
claimed the dominance of brahmanas and ksatriyas, even from
the fourth and fifth centuries aD. Thus, Kafici was truly hetero-
geneous in its socio-religious affiliations even before the rise of
the Pallavas, and tended to evolve four major sectors in its
internal structure by the seventh century aD, viz., Buddhist, Jain,
Vaisnava and Saiva.
The Early Medieval Phase
Kaficipuram’s urban character underwent significant changes
when it was drawn into the reurbanization process of the early
medieval period, which began with the agrarian integration of
Tondainadu. The agricultural hinterland, which sustained the
city’s population, was initially confined to Eyil Kottam in which
Kaficipuram was located. Its expansion beyond Eyil Kottam
began with the Pallava land grants of the seventh to ninth
centuries,'”! but more significantly from the ninth century, when
a higher level of agrarian integration began under the Colas.
Correspondingly, the Saiva, Vaisnava and Jain sectors of the city
came to expand, so as to cover almost the whole area of modern
Kaficipuram. From the tenth to thirteenth centuries, under the
Célas, the city’s growth was continuous, the expansion of its
hinterland’ corresponding to the city’s expansion’ in the form
of new temples, or rebuilding and elaboration of existing ones,
to all of which grants of land and dévadana villages were made
in various Kottams. By the mid-thirteenth century, over sixty
* See map on Kancipuram, the Hinterland, Map 14.
** See map of Kancipuram City, Map 1).
Sz J Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
devadana villages, two pallicandam (Jain) villages for Jina-Kafici
and lands in several other brahmadeya and non-brahmadeya
centres, were made over to the Kancipuram temples, covering
fourteen kottams and over eighteen nadus in Tondaimandalam,
from which agricultural and other products reached Kafici-
puram. Over fifty per cent of these grants were made by the
end of the eleventh century, and the rest by mid-thirteenth
century, a major share being assigned to the largest Visnu temple,
that of Varadarajasvami* in Attiyur, which had become an
integral part of the city by the end of the eleventh century aD.
Under the Pallavas, Kaficipuram’s commercial hinterland was
confined to three major points, 1.e. Kaficipuram, Mallai (Mamal-
lapuram) and Mayilai (Mayilappur), representing an exchange
nexus limited to the needs of the royal centre of Kaficipuram,
which had external links of greater importance till the eighth
century AD than internal links with a trade network. The few
market centres of the period known from Pallava records do
not provide evidence of such a regional network.
Kaficipuram’s commerce came to be linked to the nagaram
network only with the emergence of the inland exchange nexus
through the centuries of Céla rule, ie. ninth to thirteenth
centuries. This was achieved through the reciprocal flow of funds
(gold and money deposits) from Kaficipuram to different brahma-
deyas and nagarams of Tondainadu,'” where the local sabha and
nagaram were entrusted with the deposits on payment of interests,
in the form of paddy, service and other commodities as ritual
requirements which reached Kajici. Temple funds were thus
invested in both urban and rural enterprises and perhaps also
in cotton production, as Kaficit was the biggest weaving centre.
Kaficipuram’s umland extended even into Poysala (Hoysala) rajya
in South Karnataka, where several gavundas, pradhana mudalis of
Idai nadu gifted land for the supply of cardamom to the
Varadaraja temple in the thirteenth century.’
Kaficipuram’s commercial importance is also reflected in the
enormous influence and prestige wielded by the mahanaga-
rattar, even from the period of Dantivarman Pallava (796-846),!
as executors of royal orders and managers of temples.
+ See ground plan of Varadarajasvami temple, Map 17.
The City and the Hinterland / S95
Kafici’s relegation to the position of a secondary political
centre under the Célas, however, did not affect its commercial
supremacy. The Colas, were, in fact, more directly interested in
promoting its weaving industry and textile trade. This 1s 1l-
lustrated by the detailed financial arrangements made for the
Uragam temple by Uttama Cola in late tenth century ap,'® in
which the mahdnagarattar, saliyar or pattasalins (weavers) and
other groups were involved, the magarattar, in a managerial and
supervisory role and the saliyar, the weavers of royal garments,
as temple accountants and administrators. The katkkolas looked
after the cultivation and reclamation of lands of the Uragam
temple during the reign of Uttama Cola, and subsequently,
under Kulottunga I.’
The city’s commercial area was marked by several big streets
where merchants lived, two big streets, where the weavers
resided,'” apart from the four weavers’ quarters and another
site called Sdlaniyamam, which are mentioned in the copper
plate grant of Uttama Cola. These weavers’ quarters were
associated with the Uragam temple and its management. All
these streets and quarters seem to fall within the ancient Kacci,
the nucleus around which Kaficipuram grew into a big city.
They would also indicate a well defined commercial and craft
production area within the city.
In the hierarchy of social dominance, the magarattar, in
general, occupied a position next to the landed elite, and
contributed in a large measure to the establishment of economic
links. The Kaficipuram managarattar, however, enjoyed a more
prestigious status than other nagarams, and greater autonomy
visaais other professional groups, as politically powerful elite.
More importantly, they were also involved in large-scale land
transactions and gifts to the Kaficipuram temples,' especially
during the early and middle Cola periods, with a conspicuous
increase in the volume of gifts under Rajaraja I, Rajadhiraja I
and Kulottunga I, in terms of land, gold and money.
The presence of itinerant trading organizations like the
Nanadesi or Tisai Ayirattu Ainnurruvar in the same period
(eleventh to twelfth centuries),'” further confirms the increase
in Kaficipuram participation in South Indian trade. The period
of Kuléttunga I (1070-1118) witnessed not only a spurt in
394 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
commercial ventures, but also the movement of itinerant traders
into other parts of South India. Special attention was paid to
the textile trade and weaver’s craft by the introduction of a
series of regulatory measures in the form of cesses on looms
and weavers, for controlling the production and distribution of
cotton and textiles. The Kaficipuram region received a major
share of the attention bestowed upon textile trade and promo-
tion of the weaving industry.
The volume of trade further increased in the thirteenth
century under the late Colas and Telugu Colas, with the move-
ment of Nellur (Andhra) traders and Kerala merchants, who
became major participants in Kaficipuram’s commerce in the
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. A general weakening of the
nagarattar’s hold over Kafici is seen in the changing pattern of
patronage and the nature and volume of gifts made by traders
from Andhra and Kerala.'! It may also be attributed to the
tendency for increased monetization, which inevitably broke the
nagaram’s autonomy and enviable status in the commercial
hierarchy. Another factor which led to the breaking of the
nagaram’s independence was the use of the several currencies
introduced by the Telugu Colas and Pandyas, which the traders
from outside Tondainadu used in commercial transactions, as
well as land endowments to temples by purchase.!!!
Kaficipuram became the major destination in South India, a
point of convergence for South Indian trade in the thirteenth
and fourteenth centuries, i.e. before the rise of Vijayanagar.
Chinese and Arab trade increasingly concentrated on the Kerala
coast (Kollam = Quilon) and the Pandya coast (Tondi). The
merchants of Malaimandalam (Kerala) brought horses, spices
and other commodities to Tondainadu and presumably returned
with textiles. Cilai Cettis (cloth merchants) also moved out of
Kaficipuram and Mayilappir to the west through the Kongu
highway, i.e. Salem-Coimbatore region.!
Kafcipuram had also become the headquarters of the supra-
local organization of the Vamiya nagaram by the end of the
twelfth century ap.' Although the mahanadu (supralocal) or-
ganization of the kaikkolas, with Kaficipuram as its logical
meeting place, is not known from inscriptions prior to the
Vijayanagar period, i.e. fifteenth century,'* there are strong
The City and the Hinterland / 395
indications of the existence of such a forum for the weavers
even by the thirteenth century AD.
Kaficipuram’s urbanism also derives from its role as the
political centre of Tondaimandalam from the commencement
of the Christian era. However, direct political control over
Tondaimandalam was established only under the Pallavas of the
Simhavisnu line in the sixth century aD. Kaficipuram’s role as
an administrative centre continued with equal vigour under the
Célas, although it had been relegated to the position of a
secondary capital. Kaiici served as the base of military operations
under the early and middle Colas," particularly during the
Céla-Rastrakita (tenth century) and Cola-Calukya (eleventh and
twelfth centuries) conflicts. Later, under Kulottunga I and his
successors, Céla commanders from Kaficipuram led expeditions
as far as Kalinga (Orissa).''® Cola royal officers, both civil and
military, are highly visible in Kaficipuram’s inscriptions, as
donors, administrators and military leaders.''’ The auditing of
temple accounts in various centres of Tondaimandalam was
carried out from Kaficipuram, and occasionally from Tiruvorri-
yar,'!® another centre of direct control exercised by the Cola
government over the city and its hinterland. The royal palace
of the Colas in Kaficipuram is referred to in a number of
inscriptions from the period of Sundara Cola (c ap 956-73).
Cultural Role of Kaficipuram
Kaficipuram’s role in socio-religious changes and cultural crea-
tivity in Tondaimandalam, in fact the whole of South India, was
more significant than that of any other medieval city. Kafici’s
autonomy, as well as its very heterogeneity, as a centre of different
religious affiliations and urban concentration, led to serious
socio-religious conflict in the early medieval period. Under the
Pallavas, it was the major centre for the propagation of the
Puranic religions of Saivism and Vaisnavism, and the scene of
the religious conflict between the brahmanical sects on the one
hand and the Buddhist and Jain sects on the other, leading to
the decline of Buddhism and the subordination ofJ ainism. The
symbol of royal conversion was central to this conflict,'"” and
the bhakti (devotion) cult was the chief instrument through which
596 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
the dominance of the Puranic religion was achieved. Often
characterized as a protest against caste hierarchy, the bhakti
movement was, in reality, pitched against the ‘heterodox’ Bud-
dhist and Jain sects. It 1s significant that the early Vaisnava
(Poygai alvar) and Saiva Saints (Appar) of the bhakti cult are
associated with Kafcipuram region. The bhakti hymns derived
their content from the epic, Puranic, and Agamic tradition
fostered by the Pallavas.
The bhakti ideal emanated in a context of social differentia-
tion, where conflicts centred round social dominance, influence
and patronage, as in Kaficipuram under the Pallavas and in
Madurai under the Pandyas.!”° Initially, the Pallavas succeeded
in projecting the Puranic world view, and expressed their Puranic
(brahmanical) ideology through their exquisite rock-cut and
structural temples in dvavida style in Kaficipuram, Mamal-
lapuram and other parts of Tondaimandalam.
Under the Colas, i.e. the second phase, the bhakti ideology
was more systematically used by the ruling family, with a
conspicuous shift in the focus of political and economic power
from the brahmadeya to the temple. Stories of the religious
conflict were narrated in the hagiographic works like the Periya
Puranam of the eleventh and twelfth centuries, when the Colas
encouraged the collection of hymns and composition of hagio-
graphic works, in order to revitalize the bhakti ideology. The
Colas, indeed, gave permanence to all cult centres sanctified by
bhakti hymns, replicating the temple's role as the superordinate
instrument of integration in each of them and in the newly
emerging agrarian centres and urban nuclei. This was achieved
through renovation in stone of old shrines and construction of
new ones. Architecturally, the major temple projects were meant,
however, only for the royal/ceremonial centres like Kaficipuram.
The above process is reflected, to a remarkable degree, in the
expansion of the city of Kaficipuram, where all the major shrines,
Vaisnava and Saiva, glorified by the bhakti hymns, with the
exception of the Paramesvaravinnagaram,'2!
evolved as temple »
centres under the Colas. The process is repeated in the whole of
Tondaimandalam, where not a single temple of the bhakti cult
was constructed earlier than the early Cola period (AD 850-985),!”
Sectarianism and conflict were inherent in the bhakti cult,
The City and the Hinterland / 397
and even within the Puranic religions, it led to a serious rivalry
between Saivism and Vaisnavism and a societal crisis in the
twelfth century, the former having consolidated itself under the
Célas and the latter seeking a wider popular base. Ramanyja,
the Vaisnava teacher-reformer, spent his formative years in
Kaficipuram,'?? where he imbibed the ideals of Visista-advaita
(qualified monism) and founded the Sri-Vaisnava religion. The
most eventful phase of his activities was more fully enacted in
Srirangam, the greatest of the Vaisnava centres, and subsequently,
in Tirupati and Melkote (Mysore region). Ramanuja’s liberal
measures to widen the social base of Vaisnavism involved a
reorganization of rituals in Srirangam and the incorporation of
non-brahmana (sudra) elements into Vaisnava worship, thus creat-
ing avenues of status enhancement for the artisanal and other
lower caste groups, the weavers (kazkkolas) being one of the chief
beneficiaries. The Sri Vaisnava community later split on this
issue into the Vadakalai (northern and Sanskritic) and the
Tenkalai (Southern and Tamil Prabandhic) sects.'”* Although
Visnu worship in Kaficipuram was as old as the ‘Sangam age’,
the period after Ramanuja saw the most remarkable shift in
Kaficipuram’s ceremonial centre to the Visnu temple at
Attiyar, the Vaisnava section of Kaficipuram. The shift had its
reverberations in the hinterland, where in most Cola centres
Visnu temples were either newly constructed or older ones
revived. Many of them linked themselves with Kaficipuram by
following the ritual traditions of the Varadaraja temple.'” The
reformist zeal of Ramanuja seems to have precipitated the
- Saiva-Vaisnava rivalry for patronage, when looked at from the
evidence of the Vaisnava texts referring to Ramanuja’s persecu-
tion by a Cola ruler, possibly Kulottunga II.’ The Saiva
protagonists not only resorted to a harking back to the bhakti
tradition by composing hagiologies, but also organized Saiva
mathas as custodians of the hymnal literature, the Saiva
Siddhanta canon evolving from this period.'?”? The Saiva
propagatory measures are well articulated through the prolifera-
tion of monastic lineages all over the Tamil country, a number
of mathas coming up in the weaving and trading centres of
Tondaimandalam, particularly around Kafcipuram.'*
Two important connections may be made in retrospect, which
598 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
are relevant to the Kaficipuram region. In the earlier conflict,
the Jains and Buddhists suffered a general decline, and, judging
by later history and traditions, many of the Jain centres!’
around Kafcipuram, which appear to have been weaving centres,
were converted into Saiva ones dominated by the Kalamukhas
(-Pasupatas). The second is the near total decline of Buddhism,
although a later thirteenth century reference to the Bauddhapalli
(Buddhist monastery) in Kaficipuram’° along with the streets
of merchants, would indicate its survival despite the traditional
belief that Sankara, the Advaita philosopher, rooted out Bud-
dhism from Kaficipuram when he established the Sakta Pitha
(the present Kamaksi temple) in this centre.'*' The Buddhist
sector in Kafici thus merged with the Saiva one. Jainism, how-
ever, survived in Jina-Kajici and other centres in Tondaimanda-
lam, and this should be attributed to the adoption of the
Puranic tradition and the temple-based worship by the Jains.
Kanicipuram’s multiple roles as a dynastic, commercial and
cultural centre, would show that it is its urban context, i.e. as
a city of heterogeneous population of different socio-religious
affiliations, that generated conflict and tension. However, con-
stant shifts in the ideological base by politically powerful elite,
and new societal alliances, helped to resolve such conflicts in
medieval South India, as reflected in the growth of Kaficipuram
into a multi-temple complex. In its role as a centre of cultural
creativity, especially art, religion and literature, Kafcipuram
surpassed all other medieval cities of South India. Its continuous
importance as a prime mover in the ideological shifts, cultural
changes and the reorganization or restructuring of Tamil Society
and patterns of patronage, was not shared even by Madurai,
which was the Tamil city par excellence in the early historical
period. Tafijavur, on the other hand, was a ceremonial centre
created entirely by the political will of the Colas.
The Madras Region
The modern city of Madras did not develop, like Kaficipuram,
as a unified, compact centre of urban concentration in the
* See Map 16.
The City and the Hinterland / 399
pre-modern period. It developed out of several clusters of set-
tlements, the inter-relationships of which are not easy to trace,
due to large-scale renovations and changes in modern times.
These clusters are distributed mainly in two kéttams, the Puliyur
and Pulal kottams.
Mayilappir (Mayilarppil) on the Madras coast was the major
centre of trade in Puliyur Kottam. The antiquity of its commerce
is attested by Ptolemy’s reference to Mailarphan, identified with
Mayilappar,'"? and the Mambalam hoard of punch-marked
coins,!33 datable to the second century ap. Along with Mallat
and Kaiici, it formed part of an early exchange nexus dominated
by external trade. During the early medieval urbanization, it
came to be linked with the network of magarams and inland
commerce from the ninth century aD. The presence of two major
bhakti temples, the Siva temple in Mayilappur and the Visnu
temple in Tiruvallikkéni, which was a part of Mayilappur, and
a Jain section of the same centre, which was apparently located
in the Santhome area,'** suggest an early urban concentration
in this centre. All traces of Pallava-Céla constructions have been
obliterated in the large-scale renovations of the temples of this
area. From the ninth and tenth centuries, the commerce of
Mayilappur was handled by the Nanddest or Valanjtyar, with
their mercantile town at Kattir, and later by the Manigramam
and Axjuvannam.'® Traders from Mayilappur travelled to Cola
centres in the distant Kaveri delta and Tamraparni valley, where
fairly large urban complexes had developed under the Colas.
Mayilappiar, as a weaving centre, was linked to the larger Kafict-
puram region,'” which had a concentration of weaving com-
munities.
In the eleventh century, a cluster of settlements emerged with
Tiruvanmiyar, a bhakti centre on the coast, south of Adayaru
(i.e. south of Mayilappur), and Veliccéri or Dinacintamani Catur-
vedimangalam, as the two Saiva dominated centres in Kottur
nadu in Puliyar Kéttam.'* A second cluster of settlements grew
up around modern Pallavaram (ancient Pallavapuram) with Tiru-
ccuram (Trisilam) Vanavanmahadevi Caturvédimangalam (Pal-
lavaram) in Surattér nadu, Tirunirmalai and Adampakkam,'”
the last mentioned becoming a puram or revenue village assigned
to Tiruvorriyur in Pulal Kottam. Mangadu, Pundamalli and
Goo / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Tirumalisai, located on the highway to Kafcipuram, represent
the third cluster of settlements.'*° Pundamalli, a nagaram, was a
centre of oil trade with the Vamzya traders participating in the
meetings of the larger body of oil-mongers in Kaficipuram.
Pulal Kottam, now represented by the northern and north-
western parts of Madras city, also had several settlements, of
which Padi (Tiruvalidayam), Tirumullaivayil and Tiruvérkadu
were the most important, as their interaction with the other
centres in the two kottams is attested to by their inscriptional
records.'"!
The major centre in Pulal Kottam, however, was Tiruvorri-
yur which served as the nucleus of the second urbanization of
this region, achieving a high level of integration among Pulal,
Puliyur and Paiyur Kottams, between the tenth and thirteenth
centuries AD, linking the northernmost point of the Tamil coast,
i.e. Tiruppalaivanam, an important trading centre, with the
interior and with other xagaram centres.
Tiruvorriyur was itself linked to the brahmadeya of Manali or
Simhavisnu Caturvédimangalam, which was a puram of Tiru-
vorriyur.'* The latter’s sabha was instrumental in founding the
Siva temple of Tiruvorriyir in the ninth century AD. Tiru-
vorriyur’s importance arises from its association with an ances-
tor of the Colas called Orriyaran, the father of Vijayalaya,'®
the founder of Cola power, and from its sectarian affiliations
with Kalamukha-Kapalika Saivism.' As an ancestral trust, every
Cola ruler bestowed his attention on this centre, beginning from
the reign of Parantaka I. It developed all the characteristics of
a tantyur, without being designated as such, and assumed mul-
tiple roles, politico-economic, commercial and religious. Next
to Kaficipuram, it was the chief centre from which royal officials
supervised and audited the income and expenditure of other
temples in the region, as also that of the Tiruvorriytr temple.'*s
Tiruvorriyur acquired over ten devadana villages and lands in
twenty other centres, all located in the three kottams mentioned
above. The nagarattar of this centre were a powerful body
entrusted with the huge gold and money endowments of royal
members, and managing temple lands.'* It was, in addition, a
weaving centre with a Sdliya nagaram'”’ looking after its trade
in textiles.
The City and the Hinterland / qo.
In medieval South India and in the region of our study in
particular, the processes of centrality would seem to have been
predominantly at work in the emergence of urban hierarchies
and the shaping of the contours of the city. However, a subtle
but important distinction exists between Kaficipuram and other
areas in Tondaimandalam, including Tiruvorriyir and Mayila-
ppur. The latter would seem to be more directly shaped by the
processes of centrality. Kaficipuram offers a significant variation,
in that it evolved its urban contours and hierarchies through a
combination of both these processes of centrality and concentra-
tion. Kaficipuram’s individuality or distinctive character lies in
its relative autonomy as a city, a politico-cultural and commer-
cial centre, in which the forces of centrality furthered the
processes of concentration and vice-versa.
References
1. A legitimate concern with processes rather than typologies of
urban centres and emphasis on the need for overall perspectives
and analytical frameworks are found in all recent works on urban
history, urban anthropology and urban geography. See Philip
Abrams and E.A. Wrigley (eds), Towns in Societies: Essays in
Economic History and Historical Sociology, Cambridge, 1978; Richard
Basham, Urban Anthropology, 1978; Harold Carter,A n Introduction
to Urban Historical Geography, London, 1983. For India, the more
recent works are B.D. Chattopadhyaya, ‘Urban Centres in Early
Medieval India: An Overview’, and R. Champakalakshmi, ‘Urban
Processes in Early Medieval Tamil Nadu’, in S. Bhattacharya and
R. Thapar (eds), Situating Indian History, New Delhi, 1986. (Chap-
ter 4 in this volume).
2. Champakalakshmi, ‘Urbanisation in South India: The Role of
Ideology and Polity’, Presidential Address, Ancient India Section,
Indian History Congress (IHC), 47th Session, Srinagar, 31-41.
(Chapter 1 in this volume).
3. See R. McC Adams, The Evolution of Urban Society, Early Meso-
potamia and Pre-Hispanic Mexico, Chicago, 1966, 18.
4. See Introduction.
5. S.N. Eisenstadt and A. Schachar, Society, Culture and Urbanization,
Sage, 1987, 357-61.
Go2 Zz Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Ibid.
Y. Subbarayalu, Political Geography of the Chola Country, 1973,
chapter 1v on Mandalam.
Ibid. Chapter vii on Chieftaincies and Political Units. The other areas
included in Jayankondacdlamandalam were politico-geographic
regions dominated by traditional chiefly families positioned be-
tween Tondai nadu and Colanadu.
. The southern boundary of Tondainadu was not the river Pennai,
as is often wrongly assumed, for it extended from 13°50’ (Pulicat
Lake) North Latitude to 12°15’ North Latitude, which is 64
kilometres north of the Pennai river. To the south lay Naduvil-
nadu, later called Naduvilmandalam, and beyond it lay Cola
nadu.
10. Sudershan Senivaratne, “Kalinga and Andhra, The Processes of
Secondary State Formation in Early India’, in Claessen and
Skalnik (eds), The Study of the State, The Hague, Mouton, 320;
K.A. Nilakanta Sastri, 1958, 121; T.V. Mahalingam, Kazicipuram
in Early South Indian History, Madras, 1969, 15.
. Perumpanarruppatai. The whole work is intended as a ‘guide’ to
the route to Kacci (Kaficipuram) for those who were exhorted to
seek the patronage of Ilamtiraiyan, the ruler of Kacci.
Mahalingam, Kavcipuram, 9; also idem (ed.), Mackenzie Manuscripts,
Madras, 1972, vol. 1, Ms no. 13, Section 7.
. See K.S. Ramachandran,A Bibliography of Indian Megaliths, Madras,
1971, no. 34, 14-15. The Kurumbar are believed to be of Karnataka
origin and to have had Pulal as their centre in Tondaimandalam.
- Chengam Nadukarkal (in Tamil), R. Nagaswamy (ed.), Natana
Kasinathan, Hero-Stones in Tamil Nadu, Madras, 1978, 1-15.
is See Chapter 1 in this volume, 17 and note 94.
16. See C. Minakshi, Administration and Social Life under the Pallavas,
2nd edn, Madras, 1977; Mahalingam, South Indian Polity, Madras,
1955; K.A. Nilakanta Sastri, The Colas, Madras, 1975. For a more
analytical approach see Burton Stein, Peasant State and Society in
South India, New Delhi, 1980; N. Karashima, South Indian History
and Society, Studies from Inscriptions, An 850-1800, New Delhi, 1984.
Lf See Chapter 1 in this volume.
18. For example, Udayacandramangalam. See Udayendiram Copper
Plates of the 21st year of Nandivarman II]—South Indian Inscriptions
(hereafter S//), vol. 1, 74,
|
19. Y. Subbarayalu, Political Geography, chapter vi on Valanadu.
20. See Chapter 1 in this volume, 15; Minakshi, Administration;
Rajan Gurukkal, ‘The Agrarian System and Socio-Political
The City and the Hinterland / 403
Organisation under the Early Pandyas « ap 600-1000’, Ph.D.
Thesis (unpublished), Jawaharlal Nehru University, 1984.
21. Evidence of the increase in irrigation works or their elaboration
under the middle Cola rulers Rajaraja I, Rajéndra I (985-1044)
and even under Kuldttunga I (1070-1118), together with new
nadus, indicates that the process was continuous. Interpretations
of the epigraphic data on the nddus differ considerably. Subba-
rayalu’s view that the data indicates the evolutionary character
of the nddu under the Colas (Subbarayalu, Political Geography,
chapter v) is contradicted by Stein, who takes the position that
the first mention of a nddu in inscriptions does not mean a new
appearance but a new recognition of the nddu by the Colas. (Stein,
Peasant State, 97-9). A careful examination of the contextual
evidence of irrigation works and nadu names derived from them,
especially in Tondaimandalam (e.g. Ambattur én kil nadu) would
strengthen Subbarayalu’s assumption. See also R.A.L.H. Gunawar-
dana, ‘Inter-Societal Transfer of Hydraulic Technology in Pre-
Colonial South Asia: Some Reflections based on a Preliminary
Investigation’, Tonan Ajia Kenkyu (South East Asian Studies), Sep-
tember 1984, vol. 22, no. 2.
22. See Kenneth R. Hall, Trade and Statecraft in the Age of the Colas,
New Delhi, 1980. See Chapter 4 in this volume.
23. See Chapter 1 in this volume, 31-41.
24. Uttaramerir (A Pallava brabmadeya) in Kaliyar Kottam 1s desig-
nated a tan-karu in the tenth century under Parantaka | (aD
907-55); Kavérippakkam (a late Pallava brabmadeya of the ninth
century) as a tan-kuru in Paduvir kottam in the tenth century;
Madurantakam in Kalattar-kottam in the tenth-eleventh century,
Ukkal in Kaliyar K6ttam in the eleventh century, and so on. The
tan-kura would seem to be a creation of Parantaka I.
25. Subbarayalu, Political Geography, chapter vi.
26. Mannargudi was the only taniyér in Cola nadu. A variation of
the tan-karu or tani-ar occurs in Naduvilnadu, where Chidam-
baram in the South Arcot district, designated as a taniyur, became
the centre of a fairly large urban complex, with an immediate
hinterland marked by several périlamai nadus, representing an
agglomeration of existing and newly created agricultural settle-
ments. In all these cases, the tan-kuru represents the agglomeration
of such settlements around an urban nucleus, a process similar
to the agglomeration designated in tribal societies as sacred
territories administered by priesthood and also creating a hierar-
chy based on a sacrally defined order.
404 if Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
27. Pulal Kottam was also called Vikramasola Valanadu and Puliydr
kéttam, Kuldttunga sola Valanadu.
28. Madurantakacaturvédimangalam in Kalattir Kottam had fourteen
hamlets or villages attached to it, two of which were weaving centres
and one salt manufacturing centre located in Sembur Kottam.
29. Uttamacolacaturvédimangalam (Tennéri—ap 1005), S//, vu, 412;
Sivacilamanicaturvédimangalam (Ukkal—ap 998), S//, m, 2; Utta-
ramérur was renamed Rajéndrac6lacaturvédimangalam (eleventh
century) and later as Gandagopalacaturvédimangalam (thirteenth
century).
30. Madurantakam—Ceéns, SII, vu, 457, 465, 466; SI/J, v, 1003; Ut-
taramérur—Cerss, SII, m, 165, 166, 178, 186, 187; Tennéri—Ceris,
SIT, vu, 412.
bis Viracolappéerangadi in Madurantakam—395 of Annual Report on
(South) Indian Epigraphy (hereafter ARE), 1922 in 1922-3.
32; Kancipperuvali-from Uttaramértr. Uttaramérar Vadi—from
Kanci—S//, m, 68; see also SII, =, 133. Mélapperuvali—from
Ukkal—S//, m1, 4.
33. Tennéri—S//, vu, 411.
34. The Siva temple at Kadappéeri, a part of Madurantaka Caturvédi-
mangalam, was constructed by a chief called Sengéni Sattan
Colan—S//, v, 1003.
Iai An officer called Kumara Kalan Vasudévan, alias Atisayacdla
Muvenda Velan, built the Siva temple at Ukkal—158 of ARE,
1939-40.
36. Tennéri—240 and 241 of 1922, ARE, 1921-2; Kaverippakkam-—S/I,
xml, 307.
ain SIT, 1, 9; SIT, v, 473.
38. 139 of 1924; 195 of 1923, ARE, 1922-3; 156 and 157, 177, 178
and 189 of 1939-40; 40 of 1940-1; SI/, xu, 202.
I Seyyur in Sembir Koéttam was a salt manufacturing centre at-
tached to Madurantakam. Tiruppulivanam, a weaving centre, was
attached to Uttaramerur.
40. 216 of 1930-1 for Vanavanamahadevi Caturvédimangalam and
Tirukkalukkunram (Taniyar and Nagaram).
41. Madurantakam (Kadappéri)—397 of 1922, ARE, 1922-3. Sak-
karamallir—29 and 35 of 1940-1.
42. E.g. Matha in Brahmadesam—247 of 1915, ARE, 1915-16; and
several other tamtyars like Madurantakam and Tiruvallam.
43.
Carter, Urban Historical Geography, 14. See Chapter 1.
44,
Tiruvallam or Vanapurattir of the Bana chiefs became a tantyur
in Rajaraja I’s reign—S//, m, 51.
The City and the Hinterland / 4o5
. See Chapter 4, Table IV, Period I.
. Ibid., Table IV, Periods II to IV.
. Hall, Trade and Statecraft, chapters 3 to 5.
Tirukkaccir inscription of ap 1224—261 of 1909, ARE, 1909-10.
. See Chapters 4 and 1 in this volume.
Early Cola Period—S//, in, 103, 104, 105; SIV, v, 1357; SII, xix, 185;
176 and 181 of 1912, ARE, 1912-13. Middle Céla Period—S//, v,
1354; 130, 133, 137, 140, 141, 235 of 1912, ARE, 1912-13; 171,
176 of 1915, ARE, 1915-16; 226 to 232 of 1961-2.
_ See T. Balakrishnan Nayar, The Dowlaishwaram Hoard of Eastern
Chalukyan and Chola Coins, Bulletin of the Madras Government
Museum, 1966, vol. 9, no. 2.
Different Madais (coins), S//, 1v, 854, 861; 360, 385, 386, 428, 441
and 453 of 1919; 2 and 40 of 1921.
_ SII, v, 483, Cennaimanagarakkalvettugal, R. Nagaswamy (ed.),
Madras, 1970, 81b (1967); 477 of 1919, ARE, 1919-20.
. Eg. SII, 1, 146, 147.
. Eg. SII, w, 813; v, 849.
. 247 of 1938-9; 284 of 1959-60.
. Cennaimangarakkalvettugal, 120 (1967).
. See Chapter 4 in this volume.
Kattar—256 of 1912, ARE, 1912-13; Basinikonda—342 of 1912,
ARE, 1912-13.
. 264 and 273 of 1955-6.
. Infra, Kancipuram.
. See Chapter 4, Table VI.
_ K. Sundaram, Studies in Economic and Social Conditions of Medieval
Andhra, Machilipatnam, 1968, Appendix. Canton inscription of
Kulsttunga I for trading interests of Cola merchants in China
(Tan Yeok Seng, “The Srivijayan Inscription of Canton—ap 1079’,
Journal of South-East Asian History, 5, 2, 1964, 17-24).
. See Chapter 4, Table VI.
,
Mayilapptur—Cennaimangarakkalvettugal, 95 and 125 (1967), 454
of 1962-3. Tiruvorriyur—371 of 1911, ARE, 1911-12; 127 of 1912,
ARE, 1912-13, Tirukkalukkunram—145 of 1932-3; Mélpadi—S//,
m, 18.
. Tiruppacctr - Tiru navukkaragan Matha—127 of 1929-30, Tiru-
yorriyur - Tirujanasambandan matha—238 of 1912, ARE, 1912-13.
67. Golaki matha—111 of 1929-30. Laksadhyayi mathas (Mudaliyar
lineages)—352, 360 of 1911, ARE, 1911-12; 207, 215 and 239 of
1912, ARE, 1912-13; 247 of 1915; ARE, 1915-16; 106, 115 and
196 of 1939-40.
4ob / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
. See note 60. 264 and 273 of 1955-6.
Infra, Kanicipuram.
SII, v, 999; vu, 451; 208 of 1923, ARE, 1923-4.
. Vijaya Ramaswamy, Textiles and Weavers in Medieval South India,
New Delhi, 1985, 53-6; 108 of 1929-30.
284 of 2910; 361 of 1911; ARE, 1911-12; 250 of 1919, ARE
1918-19; 346, 352 of 1923, ARE, 1923-4; 137 of 1924; 47 and 57
of 1932-3.
. Loom tax—300 of 1910; 195 of 1923, ARE, 1922-3; 138 of 1924;
35 of 1940-1; 198 of 1961-2. House tax—228 of 1910; 276 of
1912, ARE, 1912-13.
. 228 of 1916, ARE, 1915-16; 149 of 1929-30; 156 of 1939-40.
. See Arjun Appadurai, ‘Right and Left Hand Castes in South
India’, /ndian Economic and Social History Review, June-Sept. 1974,
xl, nos 2-3, 216-39.
Ramaswamy, Textiles and Weavers, 58-9.
. It would appear that the Kaikkélas had also come to be graded
as superior and subordinate strata, based on the acquisition of
economic status and influence.
. Tamaraippakkam—6, 18 and 26 of 1953-4: See R. Nagaswamy,
Studies in Ancient Tamil Law and Society, Madras, 1978, 75-9.
Hall, Trade and Statecraft, 203-4.
K.G. Krishnan, ‘Chittaramélip-Periyanadu—An
Agricultural Guild
of Medieval Tamil Nadu’, Journal of the Madras University, January
1982, reprint, vol. Ly, no. 1.
183 and 188 of 1973-4; Merchant Guild—173 of 1973-4.
Piranmalai—S//, vi, 442. Anbil etc. See Chapter 4 in this volume,
Table VI.
- Nagaswamy, Ancient Tamil Nadu, 75-9. See Chapter 1 in this volume.
Sengamal—227 of 1916, ARE, 1915-16; Sadras—103 of 1932-3:
Virifcipuram, 193 of 1939-40,
. See Chapter 4, Table VI.
See Subbarayalu, Political Geography, 30 for the traditional account
of the division of Tondaimandalam into 24 Kéttams and 79
nadus.
Cittiramélicaturvédimangalam
(Eluvampadi)—91 of 1941-2: Cit-
tiramélipadinenbhumi Pattanam (Sakkaramalliir)—40 of 1940-1:
Cittirameéli Nangai (Kunrattur).
Kaficipuram—607 and 609 of 1919, ARE, 1919-20.
- Uraiyir merchants in Puduppattinam—102
of 1932-3.
Tiruppacctir inscription—120 of 1929-30,
. Tiruvattiyur—92 of 1939-40, part Il, para 57,
The City and the Hinterland / 407
92. Nagaswamy, Vasavasamudram, Madras, 1978; Champakalakshmi,
‘Archaeology and Tamil Literary Tradition’, Puratattva, vol. vil,
1975-6. Also see Chapter 2 in this volume.
93. Indian Archaeology, A Review, 1961-2; 1963-4.
94. Nilakanta Sastri, Foreign Notices of South India from Megasthenes
to Ma Huan, Madras, 1939, 45. Also Stein, ‘Medieval Coromandel
Trade in India’, in John Parker (ed.), Merchants and Scholars: Essays
in the History of Exploration and Trade, Minnesota, 1965, 49.
95. Manimekalai, Canto xxvii. See also T.N. Vasudeva Rao, Buddhism
in the Tamil Country, Annamalainagar, 1979, chapter 2. This
author, however, favours an early date, i.e. second century AD
for the Manimékalai, which is better assigned to the post-Sangam
period.
96. Buddhism, which was more or less confined to the coastal
regions of Tamil Nadu from the ‘Sangam’ period, is well repre-
sented in the coastal towns, in which the impact of the Andhra
coastal trade links was considerable and art impulses of the
Amaravati-Nagarjunakonda schools of Buddhist art were strong.
Kaficipuram was likewise influenced by ‘Andhra’ Buddhism and
may well have been oriented outward due to its importance as
a weaving centre.
97. T. Watters, Yuan Chuang’s Travels in India, vol. i, 1905, 227.
Hsuan Tsang refers to Buddhism, which was on the decline, to
the Nirgrantha (Jain) sect, which was still influential, and to the
brahmanical (deva) temples, which had become dominant.
98. The heterogeneity of Kafici in terms of religious groups and
sectarian affiliations is also attested to by the Mattavilasa, wherein
the Kapalikas and Buddhist bhiksus (monks) are ridiculed. The
Rajavihara, probably the Buddhist monastery referred to by
Hsuan Tsang, is also mentioned. See Mahalingam, Kavicipuram,
74-5.
79. The Pallankoyil, Jaina Copper Plate Grant, ed. by T.N. Sub-
ramaniam, Transactions of the Archaeological Society of South India,
1958-9.
100. The Ghatika’s capture is attributed to the early Pallavas of the
fourth-fifth centuries ap by the Copper plate records of the later
Pallavas. See Vélirpalaiyam Copper plates of Nandivarman II—
ninth century av. T.N. Subramanian, Thirty Pallava Copper Plates
(The Tamil History Academy, Madras); see T.G. Aravamuthan,
‘The Early Pallavas of Kafici’, Silver Jubilee Volume of the Ar-
chaeological Society of South India (1962), 63. Also, Talagunda Pillar
Inscription of the Kadamba Kakutsthavarman, Epigraphia Indica,
408 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
vil, 24-36, for the importance of the Ghatika as a brahmanical
institution.
101. Not a single brahmadeya of the Pallava period is so far known
from Eyil Kottam, wherein Kafici was located, the only excep-
tion being Pulvélur, referred to in a late ninth century inscrip-
tion from Tiruvalangadu. Kafici itself does not seem to have
originated as a brahmadeya, although it is called so in a later
inscription (ap 1030, S//, vin, 5). Pallava records refer mainly
to gifts of gold and sheep for various services in the temples,
their land grants to the Kafici temples being negligible, the
only dévadana village (Nayivatti Kulattir) was the one granted
to the Vaikuntha Perumal temple by Nandivarman II (S//, v,
827).
102. S/T, 1, 146, 147, 149; SII, m, 128 (Madras Museum Copper Plates);
SIT, 1, 828, 867; 428 of 1919; 17, 18 and 19 of 1921. ARE,
1920-1; Sivapuram—227 to 232 of 1961-2; Véppangulam—S//,
vil, 3 and 5.
103. 562 of 1919, ARE, 1919-20.
104. For Dantivarman, see SII, 1, 132. For Nandivarman II’s acces-
sion, see Mahalingam, Kancipuram, 142. For the role of the
Mahdanagarattar of Kancipuram, see also Hall and George W.
Spencer, ‘The Economy of Kajicipuram: A Sacred Centre in
Early South India’, Journal of Urban History, February 1980,
vol. 6, no. 2, 127-51.
105. The Madras Museum Copper Plates of Uttama Cola, S//, m,
part m1, no. 128.
106. 39 and 46 of 1921, ARE, 1920-1.
107. Kuraivanigapperunteru and Ravikulamanikkapperunteru were
the streets where weavers lived. Arumolideévapperunteru, Rajaraj-
pperunteru, Nigarilisolapperunteru and Gandagopalapperunteru
were the four streets where merchants lived.
108. Sale of lands by Nagarattar to the Muttaval Perra Kaikkdlar,
who gifted it to the Sokkisvara temple in the period of Uttama
Cola—S//, xix, 365 and 377; sale of lands to the Kaccapesvara
temple in the reigns of Rajaraja I and Rajendra I. Donations of
land to the Karukkinil Amarndaval temple in the early Cola
period—210 of 1975-6.
109, They made provisions for a feeding service in the Nanadesi or
ret Matha in the Siteévara temple—264 and 273 of
955-6.
110. A large number of Kerala traders, some of them with impressive
titles of high social rank (e.g. Nayakar), made huge donations
The City and the Hinterland J 409
in the Telugu Cola period. They hailed from several centres,
including Kollanam (Quilon) in Kerala.
111. Large sums of money, e.g. 1750 Nellir Pudu Madai, were paid
for repurchasing land for gift by merchants from outside. See
447 of 1919, ARE, 1919-20.
112. 165 of ARE 1968-9; 259; 272 and 279 of 1969-70.
113. See note 48.
114. Ramaswamy, Textiles and Weavers, 40.
115. Nilakanta Sastri, 7he Colas, chapters vi, vil, ix and x.
116. Ibid., chapters xm and xu.
117. SII, w=, 816, 817; xx, 365, 377; 229 of 1910; 36, 68 and 79 of
1921; 240 of 1930-1.
118. Kaficipuram—226 to 229 of 1921, ARE, 1921-2; 240 of 1930-1;
387 of 1958-9. Tiruvorriyur—386 of 1958-9.
119. Champakalakshmi, ‘Religious Conflict and Persecution in the
Tamil Country’, Proceedings of the Indian History Congress, 37th
Session, Calicut, 1976 and idem, ‘Religious Conflict in the Tamil
Country: A Reappraisal of Epigraphic Evidence’, Journal of the
Epigraphic Society of India, 5, Madras, 1978.
120. K. Vellaivaranan, Panniru Tirumurai Varalam, part 1, Annamalai
University, 1972, 60-171; 172-253.
121. This temple was built during the reign of Nandivarman Il
(731-96) and glorified by the hymns of Tirumangai Alvar.
122. This is true of all the bsakti centres in the whole of Tondat-
mandalam. A rather curious exception 1s Kuranganilmuttam,
also a bhakti centre, where a cave temple assignable to Mahendra-
varman I (575-630) exists. Similarly, the RajasimheSvara at Kanci
also came to be linked with the story of Kalarsingan, a bhakti
saint, identified with Rajasimha Pallava.
123. See KV. Raman, Sri Varadarajaswami Temple-Kana: A Study of
its History, Art and Architecture, New Delhi, 1975, 62-5; B.V.
Ramanujam, History of Sri Vaishnavism in South India upto Rama-
nuja, Annamalai University, 1973, 268-71.
124. N. Jagadeesan, History of Srivaishnavism in the Tamil Country
(Post-Ramanuja), Madurai, 1977, 39 and 169; Appadurai, Worship
and Conflict under Colonial Rule, A South Indian Case, Cambridge
University Press, 1981, chapter 2.
125. In most of the Vaisnava bhakti centres like Tirunirmalai, Tiruval-
likkéni, Tirumalisai, etc.
126. Nilakanta Sastri, The Colas, 644-5.
127. M. Rajamanickanar, Satva Samaya Valarca, Madras, 1972, chap-
ter 9.
4io / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
128. Tiruvottdr (Tiruvattiyr)—115 of 1939-40; Tiruvanakkdyil—352,
360 of 1911, ARE, 1911-12.
129. Tiruvottir, Magaral, Perunagar around Kajficipuram, and per-
haps even Mayilappur.
130. 607 of 1919, ARE, 1919-20. io Ve
131. V.A. Devasenapati, Kamakkottam, Nayanmars and Adi Sankara,
Institute of Traditional Cultures, Madras, 29.
¥32. K.V. Raman, The Early History of the Madras Region, Madras, 1959,
23-4.
33. R. Vanaja, “The Madras Museum Collection of Punchmarked
Coins—A Study, M.Litt. Thesis (unpublished), University of
Madras, 1955, 7.
134. Raman, Early History, 190; also Mahalingam, Mackenzie Manu-
scripts, Introduction xLvi-xLviu; Cennaimanagarakkalvettugal, 245,
1967.
135. Cennaimanagarakkalvettugal, 120, 1967.
136. See Chapter 4 in this volume.
ig/. E.g. 460 of 1919, ARE, 1919-20.
138. Tiruvanmiyir—77 to 83 of 1909, ARE, 1908-9; Veliccéri—S//, 1m,
114, 116, 119; xu, 205; xix, 97; 302 to 317 of 1911; ARE, 1911-12.
139. Tirunirmalai—532-60 of 1912, ARE, 1912-13. Tirugalam & Pal-
lavaram—S//, vi, 538-49.
140. Pundamalli—31 to 34 of 1910, ARE, 1910-11; 560 of 1912, ARE,
1912-13; 292 to 302 of ARE, 1938-9; SIT, vi, 537. Tirumalisai—18
and 19 of 1911, ARE, 1910-11.
141. Padi—S//, m, 181. Tirumullaivayil—S//, m, 114, 141, 174, 196; xvi,
719, 723,724, 727; JO 735, 738; 282 of 1960-1. Tiru-
vérkadu—386 to 396 of 1958-9.
142. SIT, xu, 99, 100, 105.
143. Nagaswamy, Tiruttani and Vélancéri Copper Plates, Madras, 1979,
26-7.
144, David Lorenzen, The Kapalikas and Kalamukhas. Two Lost Saivite
Sects, New Delhi, 1972, 83 and 166-7.
145, SII, 11, 145; 103, 130, 146 of 1912, ARE, 1912-13; 386 of 1958-9.
146. 132 of 1912; ARE, 1912-13.
OY 136 of 1912, ARE, 1912-13.
; Appendix
Kancipuram Expansion Through Temples
From Kacci of the Sangam period, which had a single Visnu
shrine of central importance, Kancipuram grew into a huge
multi-temple centre, comparable to Kudamukku-Palaiyarai
(Kumbhakonam) in the Kaveri delta. The successive stages of
its growth are marked by the appearance of several temples
dedicated to Visnu, Siva and Sakti and their elaboration under
the Pallavas and Colas. This multi-temple complex evolved
through centuries of growth from earlier agrarian clusters, the
temples which marked its growth representing the loci of the
ceremonial complex at different chronological points, leading
to the emergence of a dispersed ceremonial centre. The locus
of the ceremonial complex shifted from one temple of major
importance to another, depending upon the changing pattern
of patronage of the ruling families and the new temple projects,
which were royal creations for legitimation. Such multi-temple
centres differed from the sacred/pilgrimage centres, where the
locus of the ceremonial complex remained unchanged, as in
Chidambaram of Srirangam.
The following table attempts to show the growth of Kanci-
puram through a tentative chronological sequence of the origin
and elaboration of its temples based on epigraphic, architectural
and literary data. Although tradition, as recorded in the Kanci-
mahatmya’, assigns seventy-two temples (including small shrines
within larger temples) to Kancipuram by the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries, evidence of only about thirty odd temples
is available for the period ending AD 1300.
* See Marie-Claude Porcher, ‘La Representation de |e space Sacré dans le Kancer-
mahatmya’, Purusartha, 8 (1985), 23-51.
e
t I
7
e S
O
-
P I
V
CY
]
O
O
E
I
Y
A V - = - A
P
o l e
e
r
e e r h
I
P P
' W a =w y
M
= 9 4
O
S T I - O L O“ IO S T
I
0 S C I
j
e a
n j o n i s
M
a n e s o u '
j
e m
n j o n s= ¢
u
o n e r o q e l y
j
e a
n j o n n- g
u
o n e o g e l q
j
e s
n j o n n- ¢
u
o l j e J o g e l q
l A
A
°
2
I a
y e
ee s P P
A G
T =
- $
=
0 Z
0 I (
n y =
c 6 e
q ) ( s e x u a l ! w e M u v q s v g ~ — $ 8 6 - E S 8 8 e y ]e j u e s e g S S - L 0 6 e j o o e w- $ 8 - $ 9 6 - -
s t L s o y d u r a n y e y I I e B S e e C 4 4 v T J v a v yS y sg s p a y p o u a g“ Y i ( 1 1 9 1 9 4 q ) 4 1 g S a u n j u z Y I 6 - Y 1 Z L S a t i n j u a g E X Y P A M I I ] w e e p y i ¢ A m j y u r s - A e A I p u e N y u e w [ J ] w e s e p e g - e s e A s yo gw e s e g A i n j u a o - W e s e Z e u U I , - A P A I P U L K Y u e wJ ]
u
n o
e
T
I
A
p q
)
I
S
I
U I D
e
a n
) e
g
e
(
p u v q “ p a ( y v q Y I 9 - Y S I U L N e E X =Y
e
s e s /
w
e s e p
I w
e
2 s u v
s
a g =s ] t a =n j
u a
y
A
u v P o p a S a y Y r
e )
y
1
a
u v pf yo 2 4 ) q d u a - e I y O U I E Y e p u e y e z e
s
j e w n i e g e a e p u e g j e u r r u a g e y j U N y I e
A
j e u n i s g
t
= d
a
u t o yf
o
b u
v
y
u v
i
n
1 9
O
Nd
4
4
“
‘ T 7 € v
u
o U
n I
e s Y I I
o g - - : M
e S
l a
q U
T
I
Y
s
- - - o [ J
e
u
s
j e a n j o n y i s u o n e s o q e l y j e a m j o n n g u o r e s o g e l y j e a n j o n a i s w o n e s 0 g e y y - a i e W e p U N y
j
e
s
- = - - u I
I
e
I
| N
e l
e
|
P
p
u
mb ub e
yS pb
p e l e y - 8 1 0 1 u r l e y - v l 0 l - - - w e s e r
e
y
‘
w
e
S
- - - e
s
y
‘
2
M 1 a
e r
1 0 I n k n i y u I s I n y e A n q e i i y a l a y u e y n t y H O M F E T A p a a n t y I e - e j e a r g w e u u e a ‘ a i n g e s a i t ]
w
y
P
g
g
U
l
p
a
u
O
N
U
s‘
Ww
e
i
sn
ad
un
T To
e ( e s e p e s e A I W I E A S e ( n y q e i s y f e e e n a d e s e y e i d e d i q E U U W I N I S E I E N ] P U U P A R T E A R j e w i n s 2 g Y y s N U S I A 2 O
W
u r y u l s o d u r
a
)
21
22
¢ ‘ 9 > " g 6 7 4 ] 3 1 e ]
e
a
a
e
C P A O O E I - O S Z I u o n e I o g e l
y
u o n e i o g e l
y
u o n e i o g e T
y
- e A n y q u i e s s j a t y >
V T Z I - O S I I n e s o q e
q
n r s o g e l
y
n e s o g e
y
e A e s ‘
4 Y T O S u o u o u o
M
T -
VI
l O D
P o l e d
P L S
M7 G
—
O S T I - O L O
e s| u
n y o j n y
O Z I T
- O Z O I
A V P
A
y
u a s G T 8 6 l e y
e y q )
( s e
u
A P P L Y
A V| Y
O
L O I -
S
e s ]i p u
r t e y
b y - v l
O l
e l
]e s m y p
e
b S - 8 I
0 1
*
:
y
n 8
S
y=0
y-
u r a a S 8 6
d ]
j v
a u
s K - - =
I Y Y =I L n j u a
g
U Y
L a N T - 4 a 1 4 Y I
s vS S E
I
e U L G
g :
- =
A
P
Z
y Y
L
U-
o u fr yo v a i v S e u£ v K y y y 4 1 6 - 9 1 s a l s n j u a y r u Yy W o u l o r y N p e y x A r e s e y y “ w e q u i e y y w e u e k e y I E x Q U Y W E J P “ T e J o W N I I U R J U E
p y E
i
l
s
y e
y
Z A
P Z
U
N
I
]
4 ) d u a w W r e s e a I R A S I I W E Y U W I E J E o w n s t y y e y E
2 P e I
yo
W L
A
fp S
v I
u T U
s m i y L Y
n L
U
v C )
o
N
u t
d
“ O y | | “ Z | “ ¢ ]
=
‘ + l
1
Z
S
0
-
I
£
ZqO
O
v
T
VI
T
S
O
-
| :I
«Y=Z
YS
VO
s
a
7
V
I
0
Z
0
-
P P 1 W q O S I I
7
1Zv q
s
a
l
A
ru ) r 5 6
( a o pv4j o]o 1 - 0
e u N 0
y e
s
a p i
a P
P I
[ q
0 2
y
v
p
u ] D
e a
v
N
j o G 0 S
8
a t e ) n . 4 A C y S M y $ 8 6 -
v
s a j d u r 7 a p u p p o u K u — n y y A i n j u a > A i n j u > A i n j u a > A i n j u a > A i n j u a >
.
P
o
u
aZ
o
u a
d p
N
O C
i
s u
y v a v i [ v d ] u a g e y u r t s e
l e y
l eAyi)n y u a
d 4 4 6 6 y g 4 6 W 1 1
6
o e
p s
a q f i o p y a p d u c a y e y p e u e s e p
e
y
( e r e a
syoaqyu r i
B I V A S I I C A R
I
T Y
P I L A S I I C A R I ] e I e A S I B U E
I
E W ]
B I v A S I A N Y | P I C A S I I E A R
I
I Y
v
u
m
= u t O N a q i f o d o y v u v
y
u v a n
d
S T = ‘ 9 1 “ L I ‘ s I ‘ é l “ Q Z© — =-
e
a
i
n
e
e
i
s
e
r
a
H
e
@ I _ O R I M
e
Z M
S n
O a
T
-
S
h
T E S
GC
O
O
S
T y
V l
e
g
o
=
e
l
A S|
V
O S
TZ
II O S e
y
c
u o
n
T -
a
V
A l v j o r y p o u a d 1 P P ! W C o r d O S I I - 0 L O I c y e a n j o n s y ¢ u o n e r o g e T y e 8] u n y o j n y O Z I I - O Z O I
1 c
4 6
5
0-
P P I W 7 g 1 O L O I
—-
t Y l e] s e l e y -p SI 8 6 — - P s ]p u s l e
y
b - Z 1 0 1
L eI b
U O
Y
I
A
a s v g d 8 6 - 0 5 8 e I P U D 6 } 6 8 - 6 9 6
K U v q $ 6 9 - 9 5 E W E 2 D
{
/
)
i
r s
w td s
a
”
| | e
e a
r g i
e L{
e
o
p c
U
P
U
s 2 3 j d u i z ] p i u o d I l 7 u v r l J o 7 4 1 a j d u c a y S P I C A S I U P W I P I P A S T Y A O S e s e a s a d e o o r y y D F W e ) ] I e p y r ) ( P A D P E Y E W p o e p e p a s r o u y
A
E e
O d T
m = 7 n n
1 2 u l d o yj o e r u v i
“ O N od l k . I Z ‘ T Z € Z W Z
S
I] , I]
efestypelerfye srypeley
A
i u
I T ] n j j o n
u ee
0
I b9-ZS01 b9-ZS P f e r e l e y 01 € S - 9 1 Z 1 s > y i ¢ | a n j o n y ¢ s o g e l y
- O Z BjOD ( ¢ )
T
I |
O Z eurEsyIA e s
y u
n n
j n
o o
y j
s u n €€-81 e 1 [J T 8 uOnSn-o€lEnIyT n y
e]
e |
i e s t b S e p u b b -
y- rb
p e l e 8 1 0 t e y l 0 l
y1
vAJEDEIExUeS
j@q
) L
s A
r e e I E pue
a Y (gjeary
e E
n I
u O
P I P A S U I G ( w
r e y
B I
v A S P I
V A S Q U E I E I
ereasnoyedun
1
g
y sy
(
e
w
U
e
e
i
Y
o yxyeury)
I
A
N
U
T PIBASUIESEN
PIPASIULIEY eseAsSuUes EURIESYy
S ‘Ot ‘ T E 43 e e
Z
5
5
0
S
_
I
Z
S
O
-
| l
E
O
O
- q :
I l
T e
S g
O o
w - s
O S
Z
I=
o
n
e
O u
S
:
—
A l P I N W % 9 D Z
|
O S i T - 0 Z
0 1
e |8 ( u é n ) y o j n
y
P s| u ( n ¢ n )o j n
y
u O o I e A O U S
D Y
e ]s u n j o j n
y
O Z I T - O Z 0 I . 0 —
0
P
I
A
f
)
:
S
i
8 6 ] - v u S
P P I W - Y J 9 D O L O I - § n s v d d n ( 1 . 2 i u 1 v y y S S
I j S
A I
a
y
t
j
- :
d u y y S
j n
O = - S
Z 8 s a
w v
i u S
B J 8 6 —
$ f
g v
n i .
u u
K - :
.
f
n t C
e
s
g
i - y Y y :
| R e
) A l
r I S W e s e
P a r
P
e d [
W
N Y y
S
- W ( u r P
y
e y u i
E S r
e O u
s p >
s a p . j u o y i l 9 4 1 u a a y w e j j o y y
e
e n o y U E W e E a Y v p I E
A
( 1 = ) S B Q — e y q e s g - e
s
y a y A i n j u
s
u yo d m P
d yf 4 N
2 \ u v I
s 7 E
I
E
N
P
ML O
“ O
N u l
=
a
4 ]
d
o fy
o
W U
v y
u v
i n d
€ ¢ “ v
=
e c a “ 9 6
The City and the Hinterland / 419
_
@ KALAMAST!
TONDAIMANDALAM
Urban Configurations
1300 A.D.
, we! a
1 * 7s 4n Ao
MADURANTARAM Hq
PuL oe. wae
Legend
~ ROYAL CENTRE
~ CRAFT (WEAV|I CNENGTR E
~ TAN KURU
~ MERCHANT ORGANISATION
- CITTIRAMEL! ORGANISATION
~ PORT os
-e ~w CvOAeSTvALr rTOFWrN ww feDp )e ore
Combination of Symbols Denote
Composite Character of Centres
§
WATER BODES
Map 13: Tondaimandalam AD 1300: Urban Configurations
420 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
KANCIPURAM
The Hinterland
1300 A.D.
aw a
panuvun x © —————
weet 8 TAMAR K
weneteee,,e* *.,
aAoU
an® are y > XR
‘ PALAKUNR A heyy at b* *
?
o
? KALATTUR K
VENKUNRA K_ :
:
Bereeen,,
o ee
*. *. “fee P Peewee, PINDUR K =
“eee *.
eee eee eee
Note: NUMBER OF DEVADANA VILLAGES
GRANTED TO KANCIPURAM TEMPLES
ARE INDICATED WITHIN CIRCLES IN
DIFFERENT KOT JAMS (k)
Map 14: Kancipuram: The Hinterland ap 1300
'
%
—L_IC
UL
A
J
j
i
)
a
q
,
:
u
v
i
n
d
i
u
v
y
:
¢
]
d
o
y
G22 J Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
The Madras Region : 1300 A.D.
PAIYYUR ILAN-K
Ray ef
PAIYYUR-K
KUNRAVAT TANA-K
PULAL- K
Manali
IKKADU-K
Tirumullaivayil Madavaram Tiruvorriyur
Ayanavaram
Pag: °
MANAYIL-K o oe fe
Rj
um wey
. % o- oo
eat “5.
a CHENGATTU-oK o on . Ss . unk ° i
Tiruverkadu
ive * 4 Ticvaltikken),
Tirumalisai :
Li Puliyur Moyilappur
Pundamalli
0 Mangady 4 aompakke
QU Tirgsutam "0° dove),
‘scetielieil, ra =e Tiruvanmiyur
URRUKKATTU-K >." Pallavaram Weaee
J Trunirmatai
Velacceri »
<=
@
Legend
@ Nucleus
“ed a Bim . . S bsidi
VENKUNRA-K; EA i diary
/ KALATTUR-K <a = ore
Map 16: The Madras Region av 1300
e
V
A
V O u
N V v
H i
M y N 3 Q u V 9 P N V E I N I V u n d o o N Y U S Y I INIVHS YVATY I V O N V H N Y L JNIDHS I N N Y H Y W Y TWAYNY I N S W W A T Y IvSITYMNYLL W i n s W I n N Y H Y E INIUHS SuVATY W w o n h J N V U I N ] V U N G O D N U D I S I M Y N V A T Y O B E I T i d O R Y O N N H n d v u v y 9 y d u a y
Q u v N 9Z
w y ) .
YW
i )
U i O F U A j y H I Y N j I I I T I I N I I
I T I T ,
Z A
a y
y V E Y p i s e p , D L A U H i 3 Y G Y WY pyre_=ewndq@q]q]qeqeqeUMV|VqM/@uUuaJMmMhaoQ0
—
su t g :’
@
I N R H S ( S S 3 0 0 0 9 ) ¥ v A L ©
v u o v H e e y ®
V d V O N Y W V H Y W
¥ S V O N V H V H Y H
JNINHS WNNSION
Y e v O N v H V H E M H a L N O
@
V d V O N V H WAYSLOULIANE
A A R L Y D 2 D N Y W Y E L N D
Q D
A V A 3 L V 9 D N V U L N G
W d V O N Y H Y X R H S I N G Y
@ ®
I N H S B V A T V A R @
J N R H S B W A T Y I N Y N Y
E D I N N
S YWATY N¥ddNILL 1 0 0 d d I O V U V O N O L G D
I N E S
TYWIRISd V o D E Y H T R W ®
O D
INIUHS B V A T Y H N Y N G D
W S Y O N W
H G O R Y T I d O w y s n O K L
e w u v a
s v l y s v p y i v , 2 4 ) f o u n
g
p u
n o s y ‘ L I d
N (1) (2) © © © ) © ) © @ v
3
0
u
:
. V
9
.
3
8
Urbanization from Above: Taajavar,
The Ceremonial City of the Colas
TT" Cola city of Tafjavur, like many other cities of early
medieval South India, was a temple city. It was, however,
different in many significant ways from others, both as a cere-
monial and political centre. The distinctive character of Tanyja-
vur lies in the fact that it was not only a royal/ceremonial centre,
but was created by a deliberate act of royal policy, in imitation
of a sacred bhakti centre with the temple as its nucleus and,
hence, was at once a product and symbol of the socio-cultural
milieu of the Cola period. As a political centre, it represented a
state which evolved through a steady process of integrating
different pre-existing politico-cultural zones such as the Pallava,
Pandya and Kongu (Céra) regions, each given a new nomencla-
ture such as Jayankondacélamandalam,
Rajaraja Pandimandalam
and Mudikondacélamandalam
respectively, the mandalam zone
being a new creation of the Colas to demonstrate their territorial
expansion. !
As the authors of one of the most stable State-structures of
pre-colonial South India, the Colas established a powerful mon-
archy, which was exemplified in their royal/ceremonial centres
like Tanjavar and Gangaikondacolapuram.
The role of the bhakti
ideology and its chief institutional force, viz. the temple, was
crucial in the emergence of such centres, and to the political
visibility of Cola monarchy.
From the ninth century ap, under the Colas, there is sub-
stantial evidence oft he systematic pursuit oft he bhakti ideology
by the rulers through temple building,’ institution of grants for
ritual singinogf bhakti hymns, apotheosis of the bhakti saints,
especially the Saiva mayanar, and the development oft he sciences
of architecture, sculpture, painting, as well as the allied arts of
music and dance. Another sphere in which there was involve-
ment of royalty in the propagation of the bhakti cult was in the
Urbanization from Above /' 425
collection of hymns under Rajaraja I (AD 985-1014) and the
composition of the twelfth century hagiographical works like
the Periya Puranam, narrating the stories of the bhakti saints, at
the behest of Kuléttunga II, and the inclusion of members of
the royal family among the sixty-three nayanar such as Koccen-
gannan, the ancestor of Vijayalaya, the founder of the Cola
power, and Gandaraditya, one of the early Cola kings.‘ It is also
reflected in the sacred and secular spheres of royal functions,
which became almost indistinguishable in those centres which
were founded by an act of deliberate royal policy, 1.e. a project
n imitation of the bhakti or sacred centre ‘sung’ by the hymnists.
Notable illustrations are the temples at Tafjavur and Gan-
gaikondacdlapuram,° founded by Rajaraja I and Rajendra I (aD
985-1044), where they had to invoke the temple’s integrative
role to create a royal/ceremonial city.
Tafjavar, known as Tafijai in the Cola inscriptions of late
tenth century and early eleventh century, was the centre of a
hurram, 1.€. a collection of village/rural settlements,° which the
Muttaraiyars of this region controlled before it was captured by
Cola Vijayalaya in the middle of the ninth century AD. There
is no reference to Tafijai, except in the Cola copper plates’ as
the prize capture of Vijayalaya, who built a temple for the
goddess Nisumbasidhani, till it suddenly blossomed into a huge
temple town under Rajaraja I, whose stupendous project, i.e. the
Rajarajesvaram (the Brhadisvara temple) created the most pres-
tigious temple of the dravida style of architecture.
It was the strategic location of Tafjavur on a relatively higher
ground at the south-western extremity, 1.¢. at the start of the
distributary system of the Kaveri delta, that dictated its choice
as a royal centre by the Colas, just as
Gangaikondacolapuram,
north of the Kollidam river (Coleroon), subsequently became
one such chosen site for a new ‘capital’. Together they protected
the delta, or the core resource base of the Célas. Capitals are
elusive in medieval South India, for the Célas themselves had
their residential centre at Palaiyarai, while Uraiyur, the Sangam
Céla ‘capital’, continued to be another headquarters. Thus, it
would seem that Cola political needs, ideological forces and the
protection of the core resource base, viz. the delta, brought into
existence the Tafijavur temple and the city.
426 / Trade, Ideology and
As the nucleus of a city created by the Colas, the Tafi-
javur temple represents a ceremonial complex around which
urban forms grew. The concept of the ceremonial centre applied
to cities in pre-modern/traditional societies, is best exemplified
in the studies on imperial cities of China, of Southeast Asia
and Sri Lanka.* Such ascity was organized on earthly space to
replicate or symbolize the order which pertained to the other
world structure, and this ensured survival and prosperity.’ The
cosmic symbolism of the Taijavir temple, as revealed by its
designation ‘Daksinaméru’ (the southern Meru as the axis of
the universe) and that of its lord as ‘Daksinaméruvitankar’,
also extended to the city as the centre of the territorial authority
of the Colas. This is further supported by the ritual consecra-
tion, along with that of the main shrine, also of the shrines
of the regents of the eight quarters (astadikpalas), viz. Indra,
Agni, Yama, Nirrti, Varuna, Vayu, Soma and Isana, situated at
the cardinal points.'® Thus, the Rajarajésvara temple was the
central ceremonial complex dominating the city, and was
carefully engineered to align the city with cosmic structures
and forces. One may see here the impact of the bhakti ideology,
which assisted in the process of enhancing the power of both
the divine and human sovereigns through the symbolism of
the cosmos/temple/territory. The performance of a play called
Rajarajesvara Nataka'' in the Tanjavir temple, festivals and
offerings on the birth asterisms of the royal family” etc., for
which special endowments were made by royalty, would also
substantiate the inseparable nature of the sacred and secular
spheres of interests. Although a palace site has been located
at Vallam,'’ seven miles on the road to Tiruchirapalli, the main
activities, ceremonial and political, were centred round the
temple.
Architecture, sculpture and other arts served as metaphors to
convey the different levels of meaning’? behind the obvious
religious function oft he temple, signifying changing world views
and interrelationships between religious and political functions.
The main features of these art forms, i.e. architecture, sculpture
and painting, in Tafjavur may be presented here to provide an
integrated view of the form and meaning of the temple and its
synthesizing role.
Urbanization from Above J 427
The architecture of the Rajarajésvaram was planned and
designed to represent cosmic structures, in keeping with the
Céla ideology of equating temple/cosmos/territory (Map 18).
Conceived as a madakkoyil of the uttama variety, the temple is
a sandhara-prasada (double walled vimana) standing on a high
terrace (madam), unequalled by any other Cola monument,
including the one at Gangaikondacolapuram. The total height
of the vimana is 63.41 metres from the floor of the courtyard.
The temple complex covers an area (rectangle) of 240.79 metres
east to west and 121.92 metres north to south.'* According to
one estimate, the built-up stone of the vimana and ardha-
mandapa alone covers 5144 sq. metres,'* not taking into account
the tiruccurralai (corridor around the court), panvara (attendant
deities) shrines, the two gopuras and the shrines in the courtyard.
The whole temple complex is compact, laid out and designed
simultaneously. A perfect balance between architecture and
sculpture is achieved.
The main shrine, i.e. Daksinaméru, stands in the centre of a
huge courtyard, conveying its symbolic position as the axis of
the universe. The dikpala shrines at the three cardinal points
and four corners of the curralai (corridor around the court),
with Indra’s shrine merged into the northern flank of the
Rajarajan tiruvasal (entrance), emphasize this symbolism. Each
of these shrines is a dvitala vimana (two storeyed shrine) with
an ardhamandapa in front, forming a continuous line with the
cloistered curralai, itself a double-storeyed construction.’’ Thus,
ritual consecration was performed not only of the main shrine
but also of the shrines of these regents of the eight quarters.
The CandéSvara shrine, a dvitala vimana, north of the ardha-
mandapa, is coeval with the main shrine, and the Amman
(goddess) shrine, is a late Cola addition. The Candéévara shrine,
with its position north of the ardhamandapa, was an invariable
feature of a Siva temple. The shrines of Subrahmanya, Ganapati
and even Karuvur Devar are later structures.
The consecration of Candésvara as the mulabhriya (the chief
servant/officer) of Siva,'® is an important aspect of Rajaraja's
innovations in the temple’s iconography, which acquired greater
prominence in the
Gangaikondacolapuram temple built by
Rajendra I, where, apart from a shrine for Candésa, the theme
428 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
is executed in a sculptured panel of great beauty at the northern
entrance to the ardhamandapa. tai
Structural experiments in the Tahjavur temple are significant
from the point of view of architectural stability, balance and
aesthetic impact. Some of these are a new type of potikai (T.
potikai) a new upana (upa-pitha), an innovative kal and the
kumbhapanyjara in the vimana recesses.'? The antarala, which was
initially a false one in the early Cola phase, and which turned
into a true one at Srinivasanallar, assumes great architectural
and aesthetic value in Tanjavur, as it now acquires a new
structural element, i.e. the staircase on the north and south,
leading to the ardhamandapa (antarala) and additions like the
e2 e
most imposing dvarapala figures, whose size and volume are a
metaphor in stone for power. They seem to underline the fact
that the Cola Silpdcarya (architect) Rajaraja perumtaccan (great
mason) had a more imposing size, design and form in mind
for the temple.”°
The designers of the temple sought and achieved solutions 4
to several problems such as instability inherent in the principle
of corbelling, the solution being the wimdana tower's height eeeeSeee e ee ee
(Fig. 1) being in a ratio of 2 : 1 to its width, and the ingenious
system of inward corbelling to reduce space starting at the
transition from the basal square falas (storeys) to the pyramidal
superstructural ¢alas—a cellular mode of construction. The over-
sized cupola is also the result of experiments carried out to find
a permanent solution to the stability of the roof.2!
Cola architectural style derived its forms and features from
Pallava, Pandya and even Calukya temples, but made significant
innovations, as pointed out above, the designing of the deva-
kosthas (niches) being the greatest contribution. It evolved into
its mature phase under Rajaraja I and Rajéndra I. The most
skilled craftsmen and sthapatis were brought to Tafjavar and
the major inspiration was perhaps provided by the atelier of
the Sembiyanmahadevi
temples.
. Potikat—base moulding; upana—subsidiary base; kal—pillar/pilaster; kumbha-
panjara—motif of a pilaster with a pot base; wvimdana—shrine with a tower:
antarala—inner passage between shrine and pillared hall; dvdrapala—door-
keeper.
Urbanization from Above Y 429
The spires of the two royal temples at Tanjavur and Gan-
gaikondacdlapuram represent striking features. The pyramid
profile at Tafijavur is steep, the relation between height and
width being 2 : 1. The Gangaikondacolapuram superstructure
is lower by six metres but shows a remarkably concave curvature.
The sthapatis (architects) seem to have applied the square and
circle as fundamental concepts underlying the Tafyavur and
GangaikondacOlapuram spires respectively.” This mature phase
is clearly marked by the vertical ascent of the stkhara (tower),
the innovations and solutions to architectural problems and
decorative aspects showing a high technical advance. Well con-
ceived, balanced and majestic, the temple’s architecture is the
product of an imperial vision.
The iconographic programme of the Tafjavur temple marks
the most creative period in Cola art and in South Indian
iconography. In addition to the traditionally inherited icono-
graphic forms of Siva, the Tafjavur sculptors introduced other
forms for which they invented a new layout in the double-tiered
vimana wall with a double row of niches and the ardhaman-
dapa. These forms include Bhiksatana, Virabhadra, Daksinamurti,
Kalantaka, Nataraja, Harihara, Lingodbhava, Candrasekhara, Ar-
dhanarisvara and Bhairava,” apart from other deities such as
Sarasvati, Gajalaksmi, Visnu, Ganesa and Durga, and, above all,
the Tripurantaka form of Siva, relatively less known in the earlier
temple vimanas. It is this icon which is of considerable signi-
ficance in Tanyjavur.
The Tripurantaka form is repeated in two postures in all the
niches of the upper portion of the vimana wall (Fig. 2). So far
no satisfactory explanation of such a repetition has been pro-
vided. K.R. Srinivasan initially dismissed it as due to the upper
level not being visible, while the lower level niches carry different
forms. Subsequently he related it to the analogy of the Buddha
and Visnu as representing the concept of Cakravartin and, hence,
used by earlier dynasts and suggested that the Cola, Rajaraja,
adopted Tripurantaka as his favourite choice as the Saiva coun-
terpart of the Cakravartin ideal.?4 Other explanations emphasize
the warrior aspect of Tripurantaka and the Cola Rajaraja’s choice
of this form, as indicating his prowess as a warrior.” ‘a
GarryJ .S chwindler,”* in an attempt to interpret this repetitive
430 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
use of the Tripurantaka form (there are, in addition to the
images on the vimana walls, two sculptured panels of this theme
and a huge fresco panel of Tripurantaka in the inner am-
bulatory), counts thirty such representations, and includes the
metal image of Tafijai Alagar, identified by Nagaswamy as
Tripurantaka, (Fig. 3) and now housed in the Tanjavur Art
Gallery, carrying the same characteristics as the others. He
further argues that the Tripurantaka motif has an additional
and certainly more profound significance than being a ‘portrait’
of the king as warrior. Strangely, he ends up by saying that this
form of Siva was Rajaraja’s personal deity, a model and patron,
istadevata, and that he used its unique iconographic symbology
to restore to his lineage the honour and dignity damaged by
their defeat by the Rastrakitas at Takkolam. It is, he says,
evidence of the king’s conscious assimilation of the divine and
royal roles.
Schwindler does not accept the explanation of the warrior
and military aspects of the Cola king, as he follows the theory
of the American scholars B. Stein and G.W. Spencer in charac-
terizing the Cola state as ‘a weakly organised polity’, and the
temple as not indicating the glorification of a powerful despotic
ruler’s patronage, but as ‘a method adopted by an ambitious
ruler to enhance his very uncertain power.” ”
The real significance of the Tripurantaka motif and its domin-
ant presence in the Tafijavar temple, cannot be understood,
unless one looks at the temple’s programme of iconography as
a whole. The temple being a symbol of royal power, the Tripur-
intaka form needs to be related to the ideology of the Cola
state under Rajaraja I, who was instrumental in shaping the
ideological apparatuses for establishing the superiority of
Saivism and Saivism as the state religion. To start with the
Tevaram hymns, which Rajaraja ‘rediscovered’, and the bhakti
ideology which was derived from these hymns, the Tripurantaka
episode is one of the dominant myths constantly referred to by
the hymnists, the number of hymns being six hundred and
four. Other forms of Siva deliberately chosen for description
by the hymnists”® are the Lingodbhava and Daksinamurti, which
had become a part of the iconographic layout even before
Rajaraja. However, Tripurantaka, equally significant for Saivism
N
o
.
'
vt
n e
A
A
s
w
~.
Ne
Y
_*
~»
¢ y
..
\
¥
. -_
*
t
r
e
a
] h
e
Lael wt or ~--
-
e
o sei
oe


Urbanization from Above J 431
in establishing its superiority over other religions like Buddhism
and Jainism, was hitherto not chosen for prominent repre-
sentation. Hence, its repetition in the upper niches would appear
to be a conscious act to emphasize its importance. Tripurantaka
also symbolized the warrior aspect in which he was served by
Brahma as charioteer, Agni as the arrow and other deities in a
supportive but subsidiary role in the battle against the three
asuras (fresco in chamber 11—Fig. 4). The Vedas became the four
wheels of Siva’s chariot and the Mandara mountain his bow.
Visnu as Mayamoha deluded the aswras into following a ‘hetero-
dox’ faith, but the aswras remained staunch devotees of Siva.
Hence, after destroying their three puras, Siva accepted two of
them as his doorkeepers and the third as the drummer playing
the kudamula. This whole episode represents not only a com-
prehensive attempt to make every other faith subordinate to
Saivism, as there is a veiled attempt to subordinate Visnu as
Mayamoha, but also is known in all its details to the Tevaram
hymnists and the Kalladam” in a southern version. By using
this myth and the iconographic form in the temple’s art in a
dominant position and in the narrative paintings, Rajaraja
achieved his aim of consolidating Saivism and subordinating
other faiths. He may have been inspired by Gandaraditya and
Sembiyanmahadevi and, hence, the grand plan could well have
begun even at the time of his accession in AD 985.
If the Tafjai Alagar of the Tafjavur inscriptions” represents
the metal image of Tripurantaka, as suggested by Nagaswamy,
it would be an additional supportive evidence to show that
Tripurantaka was only next in importance to Daksinameru-
vitankar, the chief idol, and with Adavallan (Nataraja), who 1s
prominently represented in the frescoes (chamber 9) and metal
images of the temple, Tripurantaka would be one of the three
dominant forms of the Tafijavur temple.
As for the bhakti hymnists, the most significant fact is their
apotheosis and representation in metal images in Tafijavur,
where the mavar or Tevaram trio,' Siruttondar and Meip-
porulnayanar (Miladudaiyar) and, above all, Candeésvara, the
mulabhrtya, are depicted. Interestingly, the stories of Siruttondar,
Candésvara, and Meipporul Nayanar are alluded to in the
groups of copper images set up by various royal officers in the
G32 ff Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
temple.*? The importance given to the 7evaram hymns and the
nayanar \s also indicated by the reference to the metal image of
Candrasekhara as Dévaradévar,* and the special arrangements
for patikam (hymn) singing 1n the temple.
The iconographic programme of Tafjavar was indeed the
political iconography of Rajaraja, whose reign saw the most
significant efforts at centralization of power through various
measures like revenue surveys, assessment, redefining nadus,
introducing valanadus and a revenue department, and conscious
efforts to promote trade and nagaram organization, for which
the institutional means were the temple and its art and ritual,
.e. the ideological apparatuses. The Tafijavar temple itself was
the recipient of revenues from several villages located, not only
in Colamandalam, but also in Jayankondacolamandalam, Gan-
gapadi, Nulambapadi, Malainadu, Pandinadu and Ilamandalam.
The economic outreach of the temple was impressive, as it
covered the whole kingdom.™ The sabha, ar, nagaram of several
centres, where lands or whole villages were granted to the temple,
and which were entrusted with the gold deposits of the temple
for payment of interest in the form of provisions, i.e. con-
sumable and other articles for rituals and festivals, hastened to
fulfil these requirements, establishing a reciprocal flow ofr esour-
ces. From northern Sri Lanka came paddy, money, as well as
oil seeds from a tree, the bania longifolia, the last item for burning
lamps.
The gifts of aw ide variety of ornaments to the various images
by the royal family were made out of the enormous booty from
the wars against the Ceéras, Pandyas and Calukyas, apart from
out of the temple treasury.
Contrary to a weakly centralized polity of a segmentary state,
as suggested in the works of B. Stein and G.W. Spencer, and
even Kenneth R. Hall,’ a theory which has influenced many
recent studies on the Cola state, it is possible to show through
an integrated study of the Tafijavar temple, that political ele-
ments cannot be distinguished from ritual elements in Cola
polity, political and ritual sovereignty coincided, and the divine
and temporal realms were conterminous.
One may also add here that Kundavai set up images of her
father Ponmialigaittufjinadévar
(Sundara Cola) and his queen,
Urbanization from Above / 433
and the images are referred to as tirumeni (sacred body),** as
in the case of the images of deities. This may indicate the
practice of setting up ancestors’ images as a part of temple
worship, recalling to mind the Devakula set up in Mathura by
the Kusanas of the early centuries of the Christian era.
Turning to the frescoes, the themes of these murals, from the
point of view of the royal author’s intentions in sponsoring
this huge temple project, are also well suited to the context in
which they occur.
The narrative panels in chambers 5, 7, 9 and 11 hold the key
to the symbolism of these frescoes. The themes have been taken
from Saiva mythology and the stories of the Saiva saints, which
were popular even before their final redaction in the hagio-
graphical Periya Puranam of the twelfth century aD. They are
meant to glorify the royal centre through its association with
Siva as the cosmic dancer, the lord of the famous Tillai (chamber
9), the most sacred of the Saiva centres, 1.e. the Koyi/, apart from
Daksinamarti (chamber 5) and Tripurantaka (chamber 11). An
earlier study of the frescoes made by me has led to interestingly
fresh identifications of the murals.’’
Starting from chamber 5, the panel on the north wall repre-
sents Daksinamirti as the central figure, preaching the ‘highest
knowledge’ to the sages, dispelling their ignorance. The figure
of Daksinamirti is highly mutilated. Yet, the identification 1s
made possible with the help of two seated figures, a 71 and his
royal disciple (?), to the right of Daksinamurti. These figures
are crucial, as they are very much akin to the painted figures
of Rajaraja and Karuvur Devar in chamber 10, and also resemble
the two sculpted figures often represented to the right of
Daksinamarti on the south wall of the vimana. Hence, it
represents an attempt to show that the royal author was an
ardent devotee of Siva and had himself portrayed in the sculp-
tures (on the south wall) and the murals.
As a background to the central figure, is a huge forest with
an eight armed Bhairava on the left, accompanied by a dog and
a seated devotee, and the sages of the forest and their wives in
their cave dwellings. The presence of Bhairava and the forest
background with sages cannot be explained, unless we see an
attempt here to introduce the Darukavana myth associated with
434 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Bhairava, who after cutting off one of Brahma’s heads, atoned
for brahmahatya as Bhiksatana.
The whole scene recalls Sundarar’s hymn on Tiruninriyur,
which describes in detail, how Sundarar, one of the nayanar,
himself heard the great truth revealed by Siva to the k:nnaras,
tigers, venomous serpents, ferocious lions, blameless ‘apasyas
(sages), while the god was seated under the beautiful banyan
tree. The saint attained eternal happiness and Siva’s gracious
feet. What is of great interest is a group of metal images set up
in the temple by Rajaraja, which consisted of Daksinamurti, a
mountain and tree with branches, animals etc. of the forest, as
recorded in an inscription of the temple.*®
In chamber 7 is the remarkable panel of Sundara ascending
to Kailasa on the elephant, after his wedding is stopped by the
intervention of Siva as Taduttatkondadeva, and Céraman Peru-
mal, his friend, preceding him on horseback. This narrative is
important, as it contains a depiction of Céraman Perumal
worshipping Nataraja in a shrine, probably in Tiruvaficaikkalam
or Tillai. The top portion of this panel represents Siva and
Parvati in Kailasa with the two saints seated in front.
The friendship of Sundarar and Céraman Perumal, Sundarar’s
visit to the Céra capital Tiruvaficaikkalam and Céraman’s visit
to Tillai, and their ascent to Kailasa are known, not only from
the later Pertya Puranam, but even from their own hymns and
Nambi Andar Nambi’s 7iruttondar Tiruvandadi of the period of
Rajaraja I.T he choice oft his theme by Rajaraja was again meant
to extol Siva’s greatness, particularly as the cosmic dancer,
destroyer of apasmara and protector of devotees. Interestingly,
the king did not show a preference for the stories of Appar and
Sambandar, evidently because they were more of crusaders
against ‘heterodoxy’, whereas the stories of Sundarar and Céra-
man had the unique character of revealing Siva’s greatness as
Adavallan, who was being invoked by Rajaraja as Sivapadagek-
hara. At the same time, the tradition attributing to Rajaraja the
‘rediscovery’ of the bhakti hymns from a secret chamber at Tillai,
for which he brought the images of the Tewaram trio, is also
attested by the metal images (pratima) of the trio set up in the
Tanyjavir temple.
Chamber 9 has the most interesting panel of Céraman
Urbanization from Above J 435
Perumal’s visit to Tillai and worship of Nataraja, whose dance
he longed to witness in person while he was still in his capital
Tiruvaficaikkalam. His wish was fulfilled during his sojourn
to the Tamil region and visit to Tillai. That the earlier iden-
tification of the royal worshipper as that of Rajaraja I with
his queens is incorrect, is clearly indicated by the fact that the
figure of the royal worshipper is exactly similar to the figure
of Céraman in chamber 7, and, further, the ‘portraits’ of Raja-
raja with his preceptor in chamber 10 hardly bear any resem-
blance to the royal figure in the Nataraja panel of chamber 9.
Céraman also sang the Ponvannattandadi in Tillai during this
visit, in praise of Nataraja. The whole scene contains details
which, in every respect, follow the description of the episode
in the Periya Puranam. Tillai is the central stage of this panel,
for the sage had journeyed all the way from his kingly abode
in Kerala to witness Siva’s cosmic dance. In chamber 11, the
two themes depicted in the frescoes are Ravananugrahamurt!
and Tripurantaka. While the latter has been discussed in detail
earlier, the Ravananugraha can also be traced to the descriptions
in the Tevdram hymns.”
It may be added here that Tillai (Chidambaram) was also the
most sacred Saiva centre, where the Cola rulers chose to crown
themselves, the coronation being performed by the brahmanas
of Tillai, a supreme act of legitimation of Cola sovereignty.
Here one may also recall the story of Kurruva Nayanar,” who
sought the legitimacy of being crowned by the Tillai brab-
manas, but was denied the privilege as he was not a Cola.
Turning to the administrative and ritual arrangements of
the temple, a comparison with the royal court would be useful.
The paraphernalia of the Cola temple mirrored the royal court.
Royal and temple servants—the talippanvaram and koyirramar—
were identically perceived and had similar duties. The Svi-
karyam (the chief manager) of the temple and of the royal
court had comparable functions to discharge. It is interesting
that, like the king, the temple images also had army groups
separately assigned to them.’! The role of CandeSvara as the
mulabhrtya \ooking after the accounts of the temple, assigning
revenues, investing through deposits, receiving paddy and other
forms of interest and ritual requirements, would also indicate
436 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
an imitation of the royal court. It would even appear that
here the king himself acts through Candésvara.
The Cola king would thus seem to have acquired a near total
identity with divinity, comparable to the cult of devaraja in
Kambuja, the medieval kingdom of Southeast Asia. In medieval
India the king of Orissa surrendered his sovereignty to god
Jagannath of Puri, and the king of Travancore ruled as the
eeaeeee ee e
representative of god Padmanabha.
The interplay of the temple’s role in religious, political,
economic and social aspects of the Cola period is extremely
difficult to grasp without the contextual evidence being high-
lighted and correlated. For Tafijavur this has been found possible
only with an integrated approach to various aspects such as
architecture, sculpture and painting, which act as metaphors
and symbols of great significance.
With the temple as its centre, the city of Tafjavur emerged
in the following pattern. It consisted of an wllalai (inner quad-
rangle around the temple) and a purambadi (an outer circuit),
demarcated respectively (1) for the residences of the priestly,
administrative and other elite groups, and (2) for the living
quarters (streets) of other professional groups, including the
nagarams and their angadis, for the palace servants (vélams),
retinues of the royal family (parivara), all of which were named
after the king and members of the royal family.
Royalty requisitioned employees from various parts of the
kingdom (Colamandalam and other mandalams) to serve the
temple and thereby colonize the city. Musicians numbering
forty-eight to recite/sing the hymns (patikam), dancing girls
(talippendu) numbering four hundred, dance masters, drummers,
parasol bearers, lamp lighters, and craftsmen like tailors, braziers,
goldsmiths and even astrologers, were brought to Tafjavar.
Brahmanas as temple servants and accountants also came from
various centres. By the time the temple construction reached its
final stages, a veritable colonization had taken place, indicating
the implanting of a royal city, including a series of army
contingents. Many were given house sites and lands for their
maintenance,”
The peasantry and artisans who supplied the city with ritual
furniture and services in general lived in the villages in the
Urbanization from Above ¥ 437
surrounding countryside. Many shepherd families of Tanjavur
and other centres were entrusted with the huge livestock donated
to the temple. The brisk commerce of Tanjavur was conducted
by the four markets (angadis) and nagarattar, while itinerant
traders like the Kongavalar interacted with them.”
The distinctive character of Tafjavur as a city derives from
the fact that it was a planted city—that it was created by a
deliberate act of royal polity in imitation of a sacred bhakti
centre with the temple as its nucleus, to sanctify which the royal
author got hymns composed by the royal preceptor, and, finally,
that it was at once the product and symbol of the socio-cultural
milieu of the Cola period.
A comparison of the royal/ceremonial centre of the type of
Tanjavur with the other cities shows that all of them shared
the ceremonial aspects. Gangaikondacolapuram also possessed
similar features of a city implanted by an act of royalty,
beautified by its temple arts, in this case to commemorate the
expedition of Rajéndfa I to the Ganges region. While these
cities had a single dominant ceremonial complex, others such
as Kudamiakku-Palaiyarai and Kaficipuram may be classified
as multi-temple centres evolving after centuries of growth from
earlier agrarian clusters, each temple, which marked their
growth, representing the locus of the ceremonial complex at
different chronological points, thus leading to the emergence
of dispersed ceremonial/sacred centres, rather than compact
ones like Tafjavur.
A third type of city was the sacred centre, which, in its origin
and survival down the centuries, is centered round a single cult
centre or a tirtha, later assuming the character of a pilgrimage
centre. To this category may be assigned Chidambaram," Sriran-
gam, Tiruvannamalai and others, which usually have a long
history passing through successive stages of growth, reflected in
the horizontal magnification of the temple structure.
References
1. Y, Subbarayalu, Political Geography of the Chola Country, Madras,
1973, 14-16.
438 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
2: S.R. Balasubrahmanian, Early Cola Temples, 1971; Middle Cola
Temples, 1975; Later Cola Temples, 1979. 7
3 Champakalakshmi, ‘Patikam Patuvar: Ritual Singing as a Means
of Communication in Early Medieval South India’, Studies in
History, n.s., July-Dec. 1994, vol. x, no. 2, 199-216. (Special issue
on Literacy and Communication in Indian Tradition).
Champakalakshmi, ‘From Devotion and Dissent to Dominance:
The Bhakti of the Tamil Alvar and Nayanar’; Champakalakshmi
and Gopal (eds), Tradition, Dissent and Ideology.
The Rajarajesvara Temple at Tafijavir is not a bhakti shrine ‘sung’
by the Nayanar. However, the Tanjai Talikkulam is probably the
site of an early shrine on which bhakti hymns were composed.
The royal authors of the Tafijavir and Gangaikondacdlapuram
temples got hymns composed on their temples in imitation of
the bhakti centres ‘sung’ by the hymnists.
Subbarayalu, Political Geography, Map 7, and list of villages in
Colamandalam.
E.g. Tiruvalangadu Plates of Rajendra I. South Indian Inscriptions
(SID), vol. m, no. 205, 45-6.
Paul Wheatley, The Pivot of the Four Quarters: A Preliminary Enquiry
into the Ongins and Character of the Ancient Chinese City, Edinburgh,
1971; idem “Urban Genesis in Mainland Southeast Asia’, in R.
Smith and W. Watson (eds), Early South East Asia: Essays in
Archaeology, History and Historical Geography, New York, 1979.
R.A.L.H. Gunawardhana, ‘Anuradhapura: Ritual, Power and Resis-
tance in a Pre-Colonial South Asian City’, in Daniel Miller, Michael
Rowlands and Christopher Tilly (eds), Domination and Resistance,
London, 1989.
Harold Carter, An Introduction to Urban Historical Geography, 1983,
13.
In the technique of orientation, the emphasis was on the cardinal
compass directions.
. SIT, u, no. 67.
. S//, i, no. 28 (On Sadayam, the natal star of Rajaraja I, there
were several),
This has been reported by Y. Subbarayalu, Professor of Archaeol-
ogy, Tamil University, Thanjavur.
E. Panofsky, who talks about ‘disguised Symbolism’ in Early
Netherlandish Paintings; Its Origin and Character, Cambridge, Mas-
sachusetts, 1953, 2 vols, and ‘levels of meaning’ in Studies in
Iconology, New York, 1939, Also E.H. Gombrich, Introduction,
Symbolic Image, Oxford, 1980, for a different view regarding ‘levels
Urbanization from Above af 439
of meaning’, wherein he emphasizes the need for setting the art
object in its context.
15. These descriptions are taken from S.R. Balasubrahmanyam, Mid-
dle Chola Temples (ap 985-1070), Thomson Press, Faridabad, 1975,
chapter 2; K.R. Srinivasan, ‘The Peruvudaiyar (Brihadisvara)
Temple, Tanjavur: A Study’, in /ndian Archaeological Heritage (Shri
K.V. Soundararajan, Festschrift), Delhi, 1991, vol. u, 525-38.
16. G. Hoekveld-Meijer, Koyils in the Colamandalam, Typology and
Development of Early Cola Temples, University of Amsterdam, 1980,
note 58, 191.
The Shrines and Curralai were constructed by Krsnan-Raman, a
military officer (commander) of Rajaraja I. See South Indian In-
scriptions (SII), vol. u, Ins nos 31, 33, 39. This essay follows the texts
as given in R. Nagaswamy, Tavjat-pperuvudatyar Koyil Kalvettugal,
Pub. by Tamil Nadu Dept. of Archaeology, 1969, vol. 1.
SII, vol. 1, nos 24 and 29; see also Srinivasan, ‘The Peruvudaigar’,
534.
Hoekveld-Meijer, Koyils, chapter 7, 317-18.
Srinivasan, ‘The Peruvudaiyar’.
Hoekveld-Meijer, Koyils, 4; Srinivasan, ‘The Peruvudatyar’, 537.
Hoekveld-Meijer, Koyils, 321.
_ Commenting on the iconographic accent in the Tafijavur temple,
K.V. Soundararajan would suggest an affiliation with Mahésvara
Saivism and the design of the Paficarama temples of Andhradesa
and as characterised by the Aghora, Sadyojata and Vamadeva
manifestations of the niche sculptures. He would also see here a
clash as well as co-existence of the 7evaram (Saiva bhakti hymns)
and the Mahéévara brand of Saivism. The clash, according to him,
led to the decrepitude of an earlier Siva temple, ‘sung’ by Sambandar
of the Tevaram trio. Contrary to this assessment of the iconographic
thrust of the Tafjavar temple, one can see a closer link with the
Tevaram, and in fact its dominance over other canonical injunc-
tions. See K.V. Soundararajan, ‘Iconographic Accent and Inflexion
in the Rajarajesvaram, Tafjavur’, paper presented at the seminar
on Brhadisvara. The Monument and the Living Tradition, GNCA,
Madras, 1993.
24. KR. Srinivasan, ‘An Interesting Sculpture in Tafnjavur’, quoted
by Gary J. Schwindler—see note 26 below.
Zz. C. Sivaramamurti, Royal Conquests and Cultural Migration in South
|
India, Calcutta, 1955, 29.
26. GaryJ .S chwindler, ‘Speculations on the Theme ofS iva as Tripur-
Antaka as it appears during the Reign of Rajaraja I in the
440 . Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Tanjavur Area, c aD 1000’, Ars Onentalis, 1987 (pub. 1989),
vol. 17, 163-78.
2F. George W. Spencer, ‘Religious Networks and Royal Influence in
Eleventh Century South India’, Journal of the Economic and Social
History of the Orient, 1969, vol. 12, part 1, 42, 45.
28. Indira Viswanathan Peterson, Poems to Siva, The —_ of the Tamil
Saints, Delhi, 1991, chapter 5 and AppendixD
. D. Dayalan, ‘Hymns of Nayanmars and the Tripurania Episode
in the Big Temple, Tanyjavur’, /ndian Archaeological Heritage, Delhi,
1991, vol. 1, 445-8.
SII, vol. 11, no. 51.
. SII, vol. 1, no. 38.
SII, 1, nos 29, 40, 43. The groups of images are 1. Siruttondar,
his wife Tiruvenkattu nangai and his son Siralan; 2. Candeévara,
his father and the Siva Linga worshipped by him.
. SII, u, no. 38. Here Rayjaraja is said to be referred to as Periya
Perumal, for whom the Candrasekhara image is set up as Dévara-
dévar.
34. SIT, , nes 4, 5 and 92.
3S Burton Stein, Peasant State and Society in Medieval South India,
OUP, Delhi, 1980; Spencer, The Politics of Expansion: The Chola
Conquest of Sri Lanka and Srivijaya, New Era, Madras, 1983;
Kenneth R. Hall, Trade and Statecraft in the Age of the Colas,
Abhinav, Delhi, 1980.
SII, 1, no. 6, Kundavai was the elder sister of Rajaraja I.
Champakalakshmi, ‘New Light on the Tanjore Frescoes’, Journal
of Indian History, Golden Jubilee Volume, 1973, 349-60.
. SH, 1, no. 50.
. Peterson, Poems to Siva, Appendix D.
Vellaivaranan, Panniru Tirumurai Varalaru, vol. 1, Annamalai
University Publication, 1980, 1220-1.
. SII, un, no. 4, 12.
. See Inscriptions Published in S//, vol. n.
. Carter, A., An Introduction to Urban Historical Geography, 1983,
13, 14. See Chapter 1.
B. Natarajan, The City of the Cosmic Dance, 1974.
€
)
0
4
)
© s
n
V d V
O N V
W V H V W
S 3 I N I
N H S
V I V d N I O
G i ) .
I N
I N H S V Y V A
S I
W N L I N G I S
a v i u
v ,
‘ u v a v a
( 2 ) V W
d V O
N V W
V I S V
© )
V d
S I O N V )
7 )
¥ 3 1 v 1
V 7
)
s t v s v i
v y
f o
V
V H O N Y O N V W
I
4 O p i 4 y
0 ) @ )
u r j q y
p
( 1 ) O N V N B u l w u y e s u n o i
U
R W
W N I S
N
§
( )
W d ¥ O
N
N y
- i
W O I T W W
e a
n s y
v e l e s
e
y
3 d
o
V O - V N Y H I V W V H X N N Y Y N I I N G l e y - y y n d O y
A W ! d
Bibliography
Original Sources
Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, vol. |, Inscriptions ofA soka, E. Hultzsch
(ed.), Archaeological Survey.
Epigraphia Indica, Relevant Volumes, New Delhi: The Director-General,
Archaeological Survey of India.
Indian Archaeology:A Review (IAR), 1961-2, 1962-3, 1963-4, 1964-5,
1965-6, 1970-1, New Delhi: The Archaeological Survey of India.
Inscriptions of the Pudukkottai State (IPS), 1941 & 1946, pts 1 & 2. Tr.
into English by K.R. Srinivasa Aiyar, Pudukkottai State Press.
South Indian Inscriptions (SII), vols 1 to XXIV, New Delhi: The Director
General, Archaeological Survey of India.
South Indian Temple Inscriptions, 3 Volumes, 1953-7, T.N. Subramanian
(ed.) (Madras Government Oriental Series), Madras Government
Oriental Manuscripts Library.
Nagaswamy, R., 1969, Tanjaip-peruvudaiyar Koyil Kalvettugal, vol. |,
Tamil Nadu Department of Archaeology.
— 1970, Cennaimanagar—k—kalvettugal, Madras: Tamil Nadu State
Department of Archaeology.
Subramanian, T.N., 1966, Thirty Pallava Copper Plates, Madras: The
Tamil History Academy (Tamil Varalarru Kalagam).
— 1967, Ten Pandya Copper Plates, Madras: The Tamil History Academy.
Arthasastra, 1951, Kautilya’s Arthasastra translated into English by
Shama Sastry, Mysore, 4th edition.
Ettuttokai
Ainkurunuru, 1980, U.V. Saminathier (ed.) with Tamil commen-
tary, Madras: U.V. Saminathier Publication, 6th edition.
Akananuru, 1951-4, Venkatacaminattar and Venkatachalam Pillai
(eds), vols 1-3rd edition, 1I1-3rd edition and Il-2nd edition,
Tirunelveli; South Indian Saiva Siddhanta Works (SISSW).
Kuruntokai, 1978, PV. Comacuntaranar (with commentary), Tiru-
nelveli: SISSW, 4th edition.
Narrinai, 1976, A. Narayanacami Aiyar (with commentary) and
P.V. Comacuntaranar (with supplementary commentary),
Tirunelveli; SISSW.
Bibliography x 443
Patirruppattu, 1955, Auvai Duraicami Pillai (ed.) (with commen-
tary), Tirunelveli: SISSW, 2nd edition.
Purananarn, 1971, U.V. Saminathier (ed.), Madras, Tiruvanmuiyur:
Dr. U.V. Saminathier Library.
Pattuppattu, 1974, U.V. Saminathier (ed.) (with Naccinarkkiniyar’s
commentary), Madras: U.V. Saminathier Library.
1. Cirupanarruppatat
2. Maduraikkana
3. Mullaippattu
4. Netunalvatai
5. Pattinappalat
6. Perumpanarruppatat
7. Porunararruppatai
Manimekalai, 1992, Venkatacami Nattar (ed.) (with commentary),
Tirunelveli: SISSW (reprint).
Nalayira Divya Prabandham (Text only) 1971, Madras: Published by
V.N. Devanathan.
Palamoli Nanaru, 1991 (ed.), Madras: Puliyur Kesikan, Pari Nilaiyam.
Silappadikaram, 1992, Venkatacami Nattar (ed.) (with commentary),
Tirunelveli: SISSW.
Tevaram Tirumurat,, i, il, Vv, Vl and vi. (Tevaram of Tirujnanacampantar,
Tirunavukkaracar and Cuntarar).
Tolkappiyam, Porulatikaram, 1982, With Ilam Piranar’s commentary,
Madras: SISSW.
Pattuppattu, The Ten Tamil Idylls, 1962 (Tr. into English by J.V. Chelliah
with Introduction and Notes), Tirunelveli: SISSW, 2nd edition.
Secondary Works
Abdul Majeed, A., Thulasiraman, D. and Vasanthi, S., 1992, Alagan-
kulam, A Preliminary Report, Madras: Tamil Nadu, Department of
Archaeology.
Abraham, M., 1978, ‘The Ayyavole Guild of Early Medieval South
India’, M.Phil Dissertation (unpublished), New Delhi: Jawaharlal
Nehru University.
—— 1982, ‘A Medieval Merchant Guild of South India’, Studies in
History, vol. tv, no. 1, Jan-June.
— 1988, Two Medieval Merchant Guilds of South India, New Delhi:
.
Manohar.
Abrams, Philip and Wrigley, E.A., 1978, Towns in Societies, Essays in
444 4 Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Economic History and Historical Sociology, Cambridge University
Press.
Adams, R. McC, 1965 (1966), The Evolution of Urban Society: Early
Mesopotamia and Pre-historic Mexico, Chicago: Aldine.
Anderson, P., 1974, Passages from Antiquity to Feudalism, London.
Appadorai, A., 1936, Economic Conditions in Southern India, 2 Volumes,
Madras.
Appadurai, Arjun, 1974, ‘Right and Left Hand Castes in South India’,
The Indian Economic and Social History Review (IESHR), ii, June-
September 1974.
— 1981, Worship and Conflict under Colonial Rule: A South Indian Case,
Cambridge University Press.
Arasu, P. 1979, ‘Ancient Ceramic Industry from Kafcipuram
Excavations’, M.Phil Dissertation (unpublished), University of
Madras.
Aravamuthan, T.G., 1944, ‘A Pandyan Issue of Punchmarked Coins’,
Journal of the Numismatic Society of India (JNSI), Vi, pt. 1.
— 1962, ‘The Early Pallavas of Kanci’, Transactions of the Archaeological
Society of South India (TASSI), Silver Jubilee Volume, 1962 (63).
Aru Ramanathan, 1973, Arupattu Muvar Kataikal, Madras, 2nd edition.
Balakrishnan Nayar, T., 1966, The Dowlaishwaram- Hoard of Eastern
Chalukyan and Chola Coins, Bulletin of the Madras Government
Museum, volume 9, no. 2, ~
Balasubrahmanian, S.R., 1971, Early Cola Temples, Orient Longman.
— 1975, Middle Cola Temples, Thomson Press India Ltd.
— 1979, Later Cola Temples, Mudgala Trust.
Balasubramanyam, M., 1985, ‘Administration and Social Life Under
the Later Pandyas’, Ph.D. Thesis (unpublished), Madurai: Madurai
Kamaraj University.
Basham, Richard, 1978, Urban Anthropology ofC omplex Societies, Califor-
nia, Mayfield: Palo Alto.
Begley, Vimala, 1983, ‘Arikamedu Reconsidered’, American Journal of
Archaeology, 87, 461-8}.
— 1992, ‘Ceramic Evidence for Pre-Periplus Trade on the Indian
Coasts’, in Vimala Begley and Richard Daniel De Puma (eds),
Rome and India: The Ancient Sea Trade, Madison: The University
of Wisconsin Press.
Bhattacharya, P.K., 1977, Historical Geography of Madhya Pradesh from
Early Records, Delhi.
Bibliography / 445
Biddulph, C.H., 1968, Cons of the Cholas, Varanasi.
Binford, L.R., ‘Archaeology and Anthropology’, in L. Binford (ed.),
An Archaeological Perspective, New York: Seminar Press.
Bird, J., 1977, Centrality and Cities, London: Routledge, 6 Kegan Paul.
Braidwood, RobertJ .a nd Gordon R. Willey (eds), 1962, Courses Towards
Urban Life: Archaeological Consideration of Some Cultural Alternates,
Viking Foundation, Anthropology, no. 32.
Braudel, Fernand, 1973, Capitalism and Material Life: 1400-1800, Lon-
don.
Bohannan and Dalton, G., 1962, Markets in Afnca, Illinois: North
Western University Press.
Burghardt, A.T., 1971, ‘A Hypothesis About Gateway Cities’, Annals
of the Association of American Geographers, \X\, 269-85.
Caldwell, R., 1887, ‘Sepulchral Urns in Southern India’, Indian Anti-
quary.
Carter, Harold, 1983, An Introduction to Urban Historical Geography.
Chakravarti, Uma, The Social Dimensions of Early Buddhism, New Delhi:
OUP.
Champakalakshmi, R., 1968, ‘Ornaments in the Sangam Age’, Journal
of Indian History, XLVI.
— 1973, ‘New Light on the Tanjore Frescoes’, Journal of Indian History,
Golden Jubilee Volume.
— 1974, ‘South India’, in A. Ghosh (ed.), Jaina Art and Architecture,
vol. 1, New Delhi: Bharatiya Jnanpith.
— 1975, ‘Kurandi Tirukkattampalli: An Ancient Jaina Monastery of
Tamil Nadu’, Studies in Indian Epigraphy, vol. 2.
— 1975-6, ‘Archaeology and Tamil Literary Tradition’, Puratattva
(Archaeological Society of Iridia), vill, 110-22.
— 1978, ‘Religious Conflict in the Tamil Country: A Reappraisal of
Epigraphic Evidence’, Journal of the Epigraphic Society of India, no.
5
_— 1979, ‘Growth of Urban Centres in South India: Kudamukku-
Palaiyarai, the Twin-City of the Célas’, Studies in History, vol. |,
no. | (Jan.-June), 1-30.
— 1986a, ‘Urbanization in Medieval Tamil Nadu’, in Sabyasachi
Bhattacharya and Romila Thapar (eds), Situating Indian History,
New Delhi: OUP.
— 1 P 9 ol 8 i 6 t b y , ’ , ‘ P U r r e b s a i n d i e s n a t t i i al o n Ad i d n r e S s o s u , t h An I c n i d e ia n : t T I h n e d ia R ol S e e ct o i f o n, I de I o H l C o , g y 4 a 7 n t d h
Session, Srinagar.
446 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
— 1989, ‘Ideology and the State in Medieval South India’, Mamidi-
pudi Venkatarangaiah Memorial Lecture, Proceedings of the Andhra
Pradesh History Congress, 13th Session, Srisailam.
— 1990, ‘The Sovereignty of the Divine: The Vaisnava Pantheon and
Temporal Power in South India’, in H.V. Sreenivasa Murthy, B.
. Surendra Rao, Kesavan Veluthat and S.A. Bari (eds), Essays on
Indian History and Culture (Professor B. Sheik Ali, Felicitation
Volume), New Delhi.
— 1990, ‘Sangam Literature as a Source of Evidence on India’s Trade
with the Western World—Problems of Methodology and Interpret-
ation’. Paper presented at the International Seminar on /ndia and
the Roman World between the Ist and 4th Centuries AD, Madras:
INTACH.
— 1991a, ‘Urban Processes in Early Medieval Tamil Nadu’, in Indu
Banga (ed.), The City in Indian History and Politics, New Delhi:
(UHAI) Manohar.
— 1991b, “Tanjavir, the Ceremonial City of the Célas’, in C.
Margabandhu et al (eds), /mdian Archaeological Heritage (K.V. Soun-
dararajan Felicitation Volume), Delhi.
— 1992a, ‘Buddhism in Tamilakam: Patterns of Patronage’, Paper.
presented at the International Seminar on Tamil Buddhism,
Madras: Institute of Asian Studies.
— 1992b, “The City in Medieval South India: Its Form and Meaning’,
in Narayani Gupta (ed.), Craftsmen and Merchants: Essays in South
Indian Urbanism, Chandigarh: UHAI.
— 1993, “Urban Configurations in Tondaimandalam: The
Kaficipuram Region c AD 600-1300’, in Howard Spodek and
Doris Meth Srinivasan (eds), Urban Form and Meaning in South
Asia: The Shaping of Cities from Pre-historic to Pre-colonial Times,
Washington D.C.: National Gallery of Art.
— 1994, ’Patikam Patuvar: Ritual Singing as a Means of Communica-
tion in Early Medieval South India’, Studies in History, n.s., vol. xX,
no. 2, July-December 1994.
—. ‘From Devotion and Dissent to Dominance: The Bhakti of the
Tamil Alvar and Nayanar’, in R. Champakalakshmi and S. Gopal
(eds), Tradition, Dissent and Ideology, Essays in Honour of Romila
Thapar, OUP, 1996.
Charlesworth, M.P., 1951, ‘Roman Trade with India: A Resurvey’, in
Coleman and Norton (eds), Studies in Roman Economic and Social
History, in Honour of Alan Chester Johnson.
Chatterjee, Anjana, 1976, ‘Socio-Economic Conditions in Early
Andhra 200 Bc 300 AD—A Study oft he Transition from Megalithic
Bibliography J 447
to Early Historic Culture’, Ph.D. Thesis (unpublished), New Delhi:
Jawaharlal Nehru University.
Chattopadhyaya, B.D., 1974, ‘Trade and Urban Centres in Early
Medieval North India’, Imdian Historical Review, vol. 1, no. 2,
September, 203-19.
— 1977, Coins and Currency Systems in South India, New Delhi:
Munshiram Manoharlal.
_— 1983, ‘Political Processes and Structure of Policy in Early Medieval
India: Problems of Perspective’, Presidential Address, Ancient India
Section, Indian History Congress (IHC), 44th Session, Burdwan.
—— 1985, ‘Markets and Merchants in Early Medieval Rajasthan’, Social
Science Probings, vol. 2, no. 4, December, 413-40.
— 1986, ‘Urban Centres in Early Medieva! India’, in Sabyasachi
Bhattacharya and Romila Thapar (eds), Sitwating Indian History,
New Delhi: OUP.
Childe, V. Gordon, 1950, ‘The Urban Revolution’, Town Planning
Review, 29.
Cohen, R., ‘State Origins: A Reappraisal’, in J.M. Claessen and Peter
Skalnik (eds), The Early State, Mouton, The Hague.
Curtin, Philip, D., 1984, Cross-Cultural Trade in World History, Cam-
bridge University Press.
Dalton, G., 1975, ‘Karl Polanyi’s Analysis of Long Distance Trade and
his Wider Paradigm’, in J. Sabloff and C.C. Lamberg Karlovsky
(eds), Ancient Civilization and Trade, Albuquerque.
Dayalan, D., 1991, ‘Hymns of Nayanmars and the Tripurantaka
Episode in the Big Temple, Tafjavir’, in C. Margabandhu, K:S.
Ramachandran, A.P. Sagar and D.K. Sinha (eds), Indian Archaeo-
logical Heritage (K.V. Soundararajan Festschrift), vol. 1.
Dehejia, Vidya, 1972, Early Buddhist Rock Temples, London.
Desai, P.B., 1957, Jainism in South India and Some Jaina Epigraphs,
Sholapur.
Devakunjari, D., 1979, Madurai Through the Ages from the Earliest Times
to 1801 AD, Madras: Society for Archaeological, Historical and
‘
Epigraphical Research.
Devasanapati, V.A., Kamakkottam, Nayanmars and Ad: Sankara, Madras:
Institute of Traditional Cultures.
Dirks, Nicholas, B., 1976, ‘Political Authority and Structural Change
in Early South India’, JESHR, Xill, no. 2, 125-57.
Dobb, Maurice, 1971, Capitalism, Development and Planning, The Hague.
448 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Economic Atlas of the Madras State, 1962, New Delhi: National Council
of Applied Economic Research.
Eisenstadt, S.N., 1964, ‘Social Change, Differentiation and Evolution’,
American Sociological Review, 29, 375-86.
Eisenstadt, S.N. and A. Shachar, 1987, Society, Culture and Urbanization,
Beverley Hills: Sage.
Eliade, Mircea, 1949, Le Mythe de L’cternal Retour, Paris.
Elliot, W., 1970, Coins of Southern India, Delhi.
Elliot and Dowson, The History of India as told by its Historians, 1.
FilliozatJ,. ,1 950, ‘Intercourse of India with the Roman Empire during
the Opening Centuries of the Christian era’, Journal of Indian
History, xxvii, pt. 1. .
Finley, M.L., 1975, The Ancient Economy, London (reprint).
— 1977, ‘The Ancient City: From Fustel de Coulanges to Max Weber
and Beyond’, Comparative Studies in Society and History, 19.
Fried, Morton, 1960, ‘On the Evolution of Social Stratification and
the State’, in Stanley Diamond (ed.), Culture in History: Essays in
Honour of Paul Rodin, New York: Columbia University Press.
— 1967, The Evolution of Political Society, Random House, New York.
Friedmann, John, ‘Cities in Social Transformation’, Comparative Studies
in Society and History, 4, 86-103.
Fritz, John M., Michell George and Nagaraja Rao, M.S., 1984, The
Royal Centre at Vijayanagara, Preliminary Report, University of
Melbourne, Vijayanagara Research Centre, Monograph Series,
no. 4,
Ghosh, A., 1973, The City in Early Historical India, Simla: Indian
Institute of Advanced Studies, 1.
Gombrich, E.H., 1980, Symbolic Image, Oxford.
Govindaswamy, M.S., 1979, The Role of Feudatories in Later Chola History,
Annamalai University,
Gunawardhana, R.A.L.H., 1981, ‘Social Function and Political Power:
A Case Study of the Evolution of the State in Irrigation Society’,
in J.M. Claessen and Peter Skalnik (eds), The Study of the State,
The Hague: Mouton.
.
— 1984, ‘Inter Societal Transfer of Hydraulic Technology in Pre-
Colonial South Asia: Some Reflections Based on a Preliminary
Investigation’, Tonan Ajia Kenkyu (South East Asian Studies), vol. 22,
no. 2 (September).
— 1989, ‘Anuradhapura: Ritual, Power and Resistance in a Pre-
Colonial South Asian City’, in Daniel Miller, Michael Rowlands
Bibliography J 449
and Christopher Tilly (eds), Domination and Resistance, London,
155-78.
Gupta, Narayani, ‘Towers Tanks and Temples: Some Aspects of Ur-
banism in South India: Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries’,
Occasional Paper Series—5, Urban History Association of India.
Gupta, P.L., ‘A Bibliography of the Hoards of Punch-marked Coins
of Ancient India’, Journal of the Numismatic Society of India, xvi,
15-19.
Gurukkal, Rajan, 1981, ‘Aspects of Early Iron Age Economy: Problems
of Agrarian Expansion of Tamilakam’, JHC, 42nd Session, Bodh-
gaya.
— 1984, ‘The Agrarian System and Socio-Political Organisation under
the Early Pandyas’, Ph.D. Thesis (unpublished), New Delhi:
Jawaharlal Nehru University.
— 1986, ‘Aspects of the Reservoir System of Irrigation in the Early
Pandya State’, Studies in History, n.s., vol. l, no. 2 (July-December).
— 1989, ‘Forms of Production and Forces of Change in Ancient
Tamil Society’, Studies in History, n.s., vol. V, no. 2, July-December,
159-76.
— ‘Towards a New Discourse: Discursive Processes in Early South
India’, in Romila Thapar Felicitation Volume.
Gururaja Rao, B.K., 1972, The Megalithic Culture in South India, Mysore:
Prasaranga, University of Mysore.
Gururajachar, S., 1974, Some Aspects of Economic and Social Life in
Karnataka (ap 1000-1300), Mysore.
Hall, Kenneth, R., “The Expansion of Maritime Trade in the Indian
Ocean: Roman Trade in the Indian Ocean: An Indian Perspective’,
The Elmira Review, vol. |.
— 1980, Trade and Statecraft in the Age of the Colas, New Delhi: Abhinav
Publications.
Hall, Kenneth, R. and Spencer, G.W., 1980, ‘The Economy of Kanci-
puram: A Sacred Centre in Early South India’, Journal of Urban
History, vol. vi, no. 2 (February).
Hardy, Friedhelm, 1983, Viraha Bhakti: The Early History of Krsna
Devotion in South India, Delhi: OUP.
Harle, James, C., 1963, Temple Gateways in South India: The Architecture
and Iconography of the Chidambaram Gopuras, Oxford.
Hart, George, L., 1975, The Poems of the Ancient Tamils; Their Milieu
and their Sanskrit Counterparts, Berkeley: University of California
Press.
450 J Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
_— 1976, ‘Ancient Tamil Literature, its Scholarly Past and Future’, in
B. Stein (ed.), Essays on South India, New Delhi.
_— 1979, Poets of the Tamil Anthologies—Ancient Poems of Love and War,
Princeton.
Heitzman, James, 1987, ‘Temple Urbanism in Medieval South India’,
The Journal of Asian Studies, vol. 46, no. 4.
— 1989, ‘Early Buddhism, Trade and Empire’, Journal of South-east
Asian Studies, xx, no. 1, March.
Hirth, K., ‘International Trade and the Formation of Pre-Historic
Gateway Communities’, American Antiquity, Xull.
Hoekveld-Meijer, G., 1980, Koyils in Colamandalam, Typology and Develop-
ment of Early Cola Temples, University of Amsterdam.
Hoselitz, B.F., 1953, “The Role of Cities in the Economic Growth of weeeciaenee yet
Under-developed Countries’, Journal of Political Economy, 1x.
— 1954-5, ‘Generative and Parasitic Cities’, Economic Development and
Cultural Change, 1, 278-94.
Huntington, G., 1980, The Periplus of the Erythraean Sea, London.
Indrapala, K., 1970, ‘Some Medieval Mercantile Communities of South
India and Ceylon’, Journal of Tamil Studies, vol. 1, no. 2 (October).
— 1971, ‘South Indian Mercantile Communities in Ceylon—950-
1250’, The Ceylon Journal of Historical and Social Studies, vol. 1, no. 2
(July-December).
Jagadeesan, N., 1977, History of Srivaishnavism in the Tamil Country
(Post-Ramanuya), Madurai: Koodal Publishers.
Jaiswal, S., 1977, ‘Caste in the Socio-Economic Framework of Early
India’, Presidential Address, Ancient India Section, JHC, 38th
Session, Bhuvaneswar.
Jha, D.N., 1979, ‘Early Indian Feudalism: A Historiographical Criti-
que, Presidential Address, JHC, 40th Session, Section 1, Waltair.
Kailasapathy, R., 1968, Tamil Heroic Poetry, OUP.
Kanakasabhai Pillai, V., 1966, The Tamils Eighteen Hundred Years Ago,
Tirunelveli: SISSW (reprint).
Karashima, N., 1984, South Indian History and Society, Studies from
Inscriptions, Ap 850-1800, New Delhi: OUP.
Kennedy, R.S., 1976, ‘King in Early South India: As Chieftain and
| Emperor’, Indian Historical Review, Mm.
Krishnamurthy, R., 1987, Pandiyar Peruvaluti Nanayangal, Madras.
— 1990a, Sanga Kala Malatyaman Nanayangal, Madras.
— 1990b, ‘Sangam Period Silver Coin with a Portrait and a Legend’,
First Oriental Numismatic Congress, Nagpur.
Bibliography J 451
— 1992, ‘Makkétai Coins’, Studies in South Indian Coins, vol. 2.
Krishnan, K.G., 1978, ‘Tamil Inscriptions in Karnataka’, in A.V.
Narasimhamurthy (ed.), Archaeology of Karnataka, University of
Mysore.
— 1982, ‘Chittiraméli-p-periyanadu—An Agricultural Guild of Medie-
val Tamil Nadu’, Journal of the Madras University, vol. vi, no. 1
(January).
Kuppuswamy, G.R., 1975, Economic Conditions in Karnataka (aD 973-
1336), Dharwar: Karnatak University.
Lal, B.B., 1962, ‘From the Megalithic to the Harappa: Tracing back
the Graffiti on the Pottery’, Ancient India, no. 16.
Leela Shantha Kumari, 1986, History of the Agrabaras, Karnataka,
400-1300, Madras: New Era.
Leshnik, L.S., 1974, The South Indian Megalithic Burials: The Pandukal
Complex, Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag Gmbh.
Lewandowski, Susan, 1979, ‘Changing Form and Function of the
Ceremonial and Colonial Port City in India: An Historical
Analysis of Madurai and Madras’, in K.N. Chaudhury and Clive
Dewey (eds), Society and Economy in India, OUP.
Logan, William, 1951, The Malabar Manual, 1, Madras (reprint).
Lorenzen, David, 1972, The Kapalikas and Kalamukhas: Two Lost Saivite
Sects, New Delhi.
Ludden, David, 1978a, ‘Ecological Zones and the Cultural Economy
of Irrigation in Southern Tamil Nadu’, Journal of Asian Studies,
n.s., 1, no. l.
_— 1978b, ‘Patronage and Irrigation in Tamil Nadu, A Long Term
View’, JESHR, xi, no. 3.
— 1985, Peasant History in South India, Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Mahadevan, I., 1968, “Corpus of Tamil Brahmi Inscriptions’, in R.
Nagaswamy (ed.), Seminar on Inscriptions, Madras.
— 1970, ‘The Ancient Name of Arikamedu’, N. Subrahmanian (ed.),
Surya Narayana Sastri Centenary Volume, Madurai.
— 1981a, ‘Arikamedu Graffiti: A Second Look’, Damilica, 1, Madras.
— 1 o 9 n 81 E b p , i gr ‘ a A p n h y, O l K d up S p in u h s a w le a s m e i In S s as c t r r i i p ti Bi o r n t h fr C o e m n te A n r a i r k y a : m ed M u ad ’ r , a s S . e minar
— 1 P 9 r 9 e 2 s , e nt ‘ e I d d ent a i t f ic t a h t e i on In o t f e rn K a a t k i a o n n d a i l i S n e m B i h n a a r r h ut on I nsc T r a i m p i t l i ons B ’ u , d dh P i a s p m e , r
|
Madras: Institute of Asian Studies.
— 1994, ‘Ancient Tamil Contacts Abroad: Recent Epigraphic Evid-
452 f Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
ence’, Reverend Fr. X.S. Thani Nayagam Memorial Lecture, Thani
Nayagam Foundation Trust, Colombo, Journal of the Institute of
Asian Studies, vol. xu, no. 1, 136-55.
— 1995, ‘Old Sinhalese Inscriptions from Indian Ports, New Evidence
for Ancient India Sri Lanka Contacts’, Paper Presented at the
Postgraduate Institute of Archaeology, Colombo (forthcoming).
Mahalingam, T.V., 1955, South Indian Polity, Madras.
— 1969, Kancipuram in Early South Indian History, Bombay: Asia
Publishing House.
— 1970, Report on the Excavations in the Lower Kaveri Valley
(Tirukkampuliyur and Alagarai, 1962-4), Madras: University of
Madras.
— 1967a, ‘The Nagesvarasvami Temple, Kumbhakonam’, Journal of
Indian History, vol. xtv, pt. 1 (April).
— 1967b, The Mackenzie Manuscripts: Summaries of the Historical Manu-
scripts in the Mackenzie Collection (Tamil and Malayalam), vol. |,
Madras: University of Madras.
— 1977, ‘Genesis and Nature of Feudalism under the Pallavas of
Kanci’, Paper Presented at the Seminar on Socio-Economic Formation
in the Early Middle Ages 600-1200 Ap, Allahabad.
Mahamaham Souvenir Kumbhakonam, 1968.
Maloney, Clarence, 1968, ‘The Effect of Early Coastal Sea Traffic on
the Development of Civilization in South India’, Ph.D. Thesis
(unpublished), Pennsylvania.
— 1969, ‘The Paratavar: 2000 Years of Culture Dynamics of a Tamil
Caste’, Man in India, vol. XLvil, no. 3 (September), 224-40.
— 1970, ‘The Beginnings of Civilization in South India’, Journal of
Asian Studies (JAS), xxix, no. 3, 603-16.
— 1976, ‘Archaeology in South India: Accomplishments and Pros-
pects’, in B. Stein (ed.), Essays on South India, New Delhi: Vikas.
Manickam, V., 1987, ‘Some Trade Guild Epigraphs and Sculpture’,
Journal of the Institute of Asian Studies, vol. 1, September.
Mc Crindle, 1927, Ancient India as described by Ptolemy, A Fascimile
Reprint by Surendranath Majumdar, Chukkerverthy, Chatterjee,
Calcutta.
— 1973, The Commerce and Navigation of the Erythraean Sea and Ancient
India as described by Ktesias, the Knidian, Amsterdam, Calcutta
(reprint),
Mc Taggart, Donald, 1965, ‘The Reality of Urbanism’, Pacific Viewpoint,
vol. Vi, no. 2,
Bibliography J 453
Merrington, John, 1978, ‘Town and Country in the Transition to
Capitalism’, in R.H. Hilton (ed.), The Transition from Feudalism to
Capitalism, London.
Minakshi, C., 1977, Administration and Social Life under the Pallavas,
University of Madras, Revised edition.
Miner, Horace, 1967, ‘The City and Modernization: An Introduction’,
in H. Miner (ed.), The City in Modern Africa, New York.
Murphy, Rhoads, 1969-70, ‘Traditionalism and Colonialism: Chang-
ing Urban Roles in Asia’, Journal of Asian Studies, 29.
Mukhia, Harbans, 1977, ‘Was there Feudalism in Indian History’,
Presidential Address, JHC, Section II, Waltair.
Nagaswamy, R., 1970, ‘Korkai Excavations’, Damilica, | (December).
— 1973a, ‘Archaeology and Epigraphy’, Pondichery: Proceeding of the
Third International Conference Seminar, Tamil Studies.
— 1973b, Kaverippattinam-A Guide, Madras: Tamil Nadu State
Department of Archaeology.
— 1973c, Yavarum Kelir, Vacakar Vattam.
— 1974a (ed.), Seminaro n Hero Stones, Tamil Nadu: State Department
of Archaeology.
— 1974b, ‘Karuvar-Vanji, the Capital of the Sangam Céras’, Journal
of Kerala Studies, |, pt. IV.
— 1978a (ed.), Chengam Nadukarkal (Tamil), Madras: State Depart-
ment of Archaeology, Tamil Nadu.
— 1978b, Studies in Ancient Tamil Law and Society, Madras: The
Institute of Epigraphy, The State Department of Archaeology,
Tamil Nadu.
Nagaswamy, R. and Abdul Majeed, 1978, Vasavasamudram (Report on
the excavations conducted in the year 1970), Madras: Tamil Nadu,
Department of Archaeology.
— 1979, Tiruttani and Velancéri Copper Plates, Madras: State Department
of Archaeology, Tamil Nadu.
— 1981, ‘An Outstanding Epigraphical Discovery in Tamil Nadu’,
Fifth International Conference Seminar on Tamil Studies, Madurai.
— 1991a, Tamil Coins:A Study, Madras: Tamil Nadu State Department
of Archaeology.
— 1991b, ‘Alagankulam: An Indo-Roman Trading Port’, in C. Mar-
gabandhu et al. (eds), /ndian Archaeological Heritage (K.V. Soun-
dararajan, Felicitation Volume), Delhi.
Nambi, Arooran K., 1977, Glimpses of Tamil Culture Based on the Pertya
Puranam, Madurai: Koodal Publishers.
454 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Nandi, R.N., 1976, ‘Some Social Aspects of Nalayira Divya Praban-
dham’, JHC, 37th Session, Calicut.
— 1979-80, ‘Client, Ritual and Conflict in Early Brahmanical Order’,
Indian Historical Review, vol. vi, nos 1 and 2 (July-January), 64-118.
— 1984, ‘Growth of Rural Economy in Early Feudal India’, JHC,
45th Session, Annamalainagar.
Narayanan, M.G.S., 1972, Cultural Symbiosis in Kerala, Trivandrum:
Kerala Historical Society.
— 1982, ‘The Warrior Settlements of the Sangam Age’, /ndian History
Congress, Proceedings, 43rd Session, Kurukshetra.
Natana Kasinathan, 1978, Hero-Stones in Tamil Nadu, Madras: State
Department of Archaeology, Tamil Nadu.
— 1991, Under Sea Explorations off the Shore of Poompuhar, Madras:
Department of Archaeology, Tamil Nadu.
Natarajan, B., 1974, The City of the Cosmic Dance, New Delhi: Orient
Longman.
Nilakanta Sastri, K.A., 1932, ‘A Tamil Merchant Guild in Sumatra’,
TBG, Deel, xx, Reprinted in K.A. Nilakanta Sastri, South India
and South East Asia: Studies in their History and Culture, Mysore.
— 1949, ‘Takua Pa and its Tamil Inscriptions’, Journal of the Malaya
Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, xu, pt. 1.
— 1958,A History of South India: From the Earliest Times to Vijayanagar,
Madras: OUP.
— 1972, Foreign Notices of South India from Megasthenes to Ma Huan,
University of Madras (reprint).
— 1975, The Colas, Madras: University of Madras (reprint).
— 1982, The Pandyan Kingdom, Madras: Swathi Publications (reprint).
Niyogi, P., 1962, Contributions to the Economic History of Northern India
(From the Tenth to the Twelfth Centuries ap), Calcutta.
Palayarai—t—talavaralaru, 1957, Palaiyarai Devasthanam Publication.
Palat, Ravi Arvind, 1991, ‘Symbiotic Sisters: Bay of Bengal Ports in
the Indian Ocean World Economy’, in Resat Kasaba (ed.), Cities
in World System, Contributions in Economics and Economic
History, no. 126, Greenwood Press.
Panofsky, E., 1939, Studies in Iconology, New York.
— 1953, Early Netherlandish Paintings: Its Origin and Character, 2 vols,
Cambridge: Massachussets.
Paranavitana, S. and Nichols, 1961, A Concise History of Ceylon (From
the Earliest Times to Portuguese Invasion in 1505), Colombo: Ceylon
University Press.
Bibliography , 455
Paranavitana, S., 1970, /nscriptions of Ceylon, Early Brahmi Inscriptions,
vol. 1, Colombo: Archaeological Survey of Ceylon.
Parasher, Aloka, 1991, ‘Social Structure and Economy of Settlements
in the Central Deccan (200 BC—AD 200)’, in Indu Banga (ed.), The
City in Indian History: Urban Demography, Socety and Politics,
Manohar (UHAI), 19-46.
— 1992, ‘Nature of Society and Civilisation in Early Deccan’, The
Indian Economic and Social History Review, 29, 4, 437-77.
Perlin, Frank, 1983, ‘Proto-industrialisation and Pre-colonial South
Asia’, Past and Present, no. 92.
Peterson, Indira Viswanathan, 1991, Poems to Stva: The Hymns of the
Tamil Saints, Delhi: Motilal Banarasidas.
Pillay, K.K., 1969, A Social History of the Tamils, Madras: University of
Madras (reprint).
Pirenne, Henri, 1956, Medieval Cities: Thetr Origins and Revival of Trade.
Tr. by Frank D. Halsey, Garden City, New York.
Polanyi, Karl, 1963, ‘Ports of Trade in Early Societies’, Journal of
Economic Hstory, XXill.
Postan, M.M., 1975, The Medieval Economy and Society, Berkeley: Univer-
sity of California Press.
Porcher, Marie-Claude, 1975, ‘La Representation de l’espace Sacre’ dans
le Kancimahatmya’, Purasartha, 8 (1985).
Prasad, O.P., 1977, ‘A Study of Towns in Karnataka on the Basis of
Epigraphic Sources’, JHC Proceedings, 38th Session.
— 1978, ‘Two Ancient Port Towns of Karnataka’, JHC, 39th Session.
Raghava Iyengar, M., 1964, Velir Varalaru (Tamil), Madras.
Rajamanikkam, M., 1964, Sarva Samaya Valarcci (Tamil), Madras, 2nd
edition.
— 1972, The Development of Satvism in South India, AD 300-1300,
Dharmapuram.
Rajan, K., 1989-90, ‘Iron and Gem Stone Industries as Revealed from
Kodumanal Excavations’, Puratattva, no. 20. ‘
— 1994,
‘Muciri-Turaimukam: Cila Putiya Ceitigal’, Avanam (Journal
of the Tamil Nadu Archaeological Society), 4, January 1994.
Ramachandra Dikshitar, V.R., The Cilappatikaram, Tirunelveli: SISSW
(reprint).
Ramachandran, K.S., 1971, A Bibliography of Indian Megaliths, Madras:
State Department of Archaeology, Tamil Nadu.
— 1980, Archaeology of South India, Delhi.
G56 ff Trade, Ideology and. Urbanization
— 1993, ‘Roman Jewellery and Coins from Karur’, The Hindu, 14
March.
Ramalingam, P., 1977, Karuvure Vanci, Madras.
Raman, K.V., 1959, The Early History of the Madras Region, Amudha
Nilayam Private Ltd.
— 1975a, Sri Varadarajasvami Temple—Kanct: A Study of its History, Art
and Architecture, New Delhi.
— 1975b (ed.), Excavations at Uraiyur (Tiruchirappalli), 1965-9, Madras:
University of Madras.
— 1987, ‘Archaeological Excavations in Kaficipuram’, Tamil Crvtlisa-
tion, V, nos 1 and 2.
Ramanyjam, B.V., 1973, History of Sri Vaishnavism in South India upto
Ramanya, Annamalai University.
Ramaswamy, Vijaya, 1976, ‘The Weaver Communities of the Kan-
cipuram Region. Circa AD 700-1700’, M.Phil Dissertation (un-
published), New Delhi: Jawaharlal Nehru University.
— 1985a, Textiles and Weavers in Medieval South India, New Delhi:
OUP.
— 1985b, “Artisans in Vijayanagar Society’, JESHR, 22, no. 4.
— 1985c, ‘The Genesis and Historical Role of Master Weavers in
South Indian Textile Production’, Journal of the Economic and Social
Fitstory of the Orient, JESHO, xxvii.
Ramesh, K.V., 1970, History of South Kanara, Dharwar.
— 1974, Jaina Literature in Tamil, New Delhi: Bharatiya Jnanpith.
Ratnagar, S.F., 1981, Encounters: The Westerly Trade of the Harappa
Civilization, Delhi: OUP.
Ray, Amita, 1983, Life and Art in Early Andbradesa, Delhi.
Ray, H.P., 1986, Monastery and Guild: Commerce Under the Satavahanas,
Delhi: OUP.
Redfield, Robert and Singer, Milton, 1954, ‘The Cultural Role of
Cities’, Economic Development and Cultural Change, Mii.
Reissman, 1964, The Urban Process: Cities in Industrial Society, New York.
Rowlands, M,J., 1973, ‘Modes of Exchange and the Incentives for
Trade with Reference to Late European Pre-History’, in Colin
Renfrew (ed.), The Explanation of Culture and Change, Pittsburgh.
Sahlins, Marshall, 1968, Tribesman, Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall.
Samy, P.L., 1982, Sanga Ilakkiyattil Sedikodi Vilakkam (Tamil), Tirunel-
veli: Saiva Siddhanta Publishing Society.
Schoff, W.H., 1912, The Pertplus of the Erythraean Sea: Travel and Trade
Bibliography "4 457
in the Indian Ocean by a Merchant of the First Century (Tr. from the
Greek and annotated), New York: Longmans, Green and Co.
Schwindler, Gary, J., 1989, ‘Speculations on the Theme of Siva as
Tripurantaka as it Appears during the Reign of Rajaraja I in the
Tanjavur Area, c AD 1000’, Arts Onentalis, vol. 17.
Seneviratne, Sudershan, 1981, ‘Kalinga and Andhra: The Process of
Secondary State Formation in Early India’, in J. Claessen and P.
Skalnik (eds), The Study of the State, The Hague: Moutcn, 317-38.
_— 1987, ‘Social Base of Early Buddhism in South East India and Sri
Lanka: BC 3rd Century to 3rd Century AD’, Ph.D. Thesis (un-
published), New Delhi: Jawaharlal Nehru University.
Seng, Tan Yeok, 1964, ‘The Srivijayan Inscription of Canton AD 1079’,
Journal of South East Asian History, vol. 5, no. 2.
Sesha Aiyar, K.G., 1937, Chera Kings of the Sangam Period, LUZAC.
Shanmugam, P., 1993, ‘Tamil Nadum Thailandum. Todarpugal’,
Avanam, no. 3 (July).
Sharma, R.S., 1965, Indian Feudalism, Calcutta.
_— 1972, ‘Decay of Gangetic Towns in Gupta and Post-Gupta Times’,
IHC, 33rd Session, Muzaffarpur.
— 1985, ‘How Feudal was Indian Feudalism”, Journal of Peasant
Studies, vol. 12, nos 2 and 3 (Jan.-April).
— 1987; Urban Decay in India (c 300-c 1000 AD), New Delhi:
Munshiram Manoharlal.
Sitaraman, Arumuga, 1994, ‘Kuriyittu Modiram’, Avanam, 4 (January).
Sivaraja Pillai, 1932, Chronology of the Early Tamils, Madras.
Sivaramamurthi, C., 1955, Royal Conquests and Cultural Migrations in
South India and the Deccan, Calcutta: Indian Museum.
Sivathamby, K., 1966 (1968), ‘An Analysis of the Anthropological
Significance of the Economic Activities and Conduct Code
Ascribed to the Mullai Tinai’, Proceedings of the First International
Conference Seminar on Tamil Studies (IATR), |.
— 1974, ‘Early South Indian Society and Economy: The Tinat
Concept’, Social Scientist, vol. 29, 20-37.
_— 1981, ‘The Social and Historical Perspective of the Early Tamil
Poem’, in K. Sivathamby (ed.), Drama in Ancient Tamil Society,
Madras: New Century Book House.
Sjoberg, Gideon, 1960, The Pre-Industrial City, Past an d Present, Illinois:
Glencoe.
Smith, Robert, J., 1973, ‘Town and City in Pre-modern Japan: Small
458 ff Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Families, Small Households and Residential Instability’, in A.
Southal (ed.), Urban Anthropology, New York.
Soundararajan, K.V., 1967, ‘Determinant Factors in the Early History
of Tamil Nadu’, Journal of Indian History (JIH), pt. 1.
— 1978, Art of South India, Tamil Nadu and Kerala, Delhi.
— 1993, ‘Iconographic Accent and Inflexion in the Rajarajesvaram,
Tanjavur’, Paper presented at the Seminar on Brhadisvara: The
Monument and the Living Tradition, Madras: IGNCA.
Spencer, G.W., 1969, ‘Religious Networks and Royal Influence in 11th
Century South India’, Journal of the Economic and Social History of
the Onent (JESHO), xii, pt. 1.
— 1976, ‘The Politics of Plunder: The Cholas in Eleventh Century
Ceylon’, Journal ofA sian Studies, vol. 35, May.
— 1983, The Politics of Expansions: The Chola Conquest of Sri Lanka and
Sri Viaya, Madras: New Era.
Spodek, Howard, ‘Beyond Rorschah Tests: Palimpsests and Nodes,
Conflicts and Consciousnesses in South Asian Urban Theory’, in
Howard Spodek and Doris Meth Srinivasan (eds), Urban Form
and Meaning in South Asia: The Shaping of Cities from Pre-Historic to
Pre-Colonial Times, Washington D.C.: National Gallery of Art,
255-68.
Srinivasan, K.R., 1958, ‘Pallava Architecture’, Ancient India, no. 14.
— 1960, ‘Some Aspects of Religion as Revealed by Early Monuments
and Literature of the South’, Journal of the Madras University, XXXII,
no. 1.
— 1991, ‘The Peruvudaiyar (Brihadisvara) Temple, Tafjavar: A Study’,
in Indian Archaeological Heritage (Shri KV. Soundararajan Fest-
schrift), vol. 11, Delhi.
Srinivasan, P.R., 1958-9, ‘Rare Sculptures from Kumbhakonam’, Trans-
actions of the Archaeological Society of South India, 1958-9,
Srinivasan, T.M., 1968, ‘Irrigation and Water Supply in South India
upto 1300 AD’, M.Litt. Thesis (unpublished), University of Madras.
— 1970, ‘A Brief Account of the Ancient Irrigation Engineering
Systems Prevalent in South India’, The Indian Journal of History of
Science, vol. 5, no. 2.
Stein, B., 1965, ‘Medieval Coromandal Trade’, in John Parker (ed.),
Merchants and Scholars Essays in the History of Exploration and Trade,
Minnesota Press,
— 1969, ‘Integration of the Agrarian System of South India’, in R.E.
Frykenberg (ed.), Land Control and Social Structure in India,
Madison: University of Wisconsin.
Bibliography / 459
— 1976, ‘The State and the Agrarian Order’, in B. Stein (ed.), Essays
on South India, New Delhi.
— 1977, ‘The Segmentary State in South Indian History’, in Richard
Fox (ed.), Realm and Region in Traditional India, New Delhi.
— 1980, Peasant State and Society in Medieval South India, Delhi: OUP.
— 1985, ‘Politics, Peasants and De-Construction of Feudalism in
Medieval India’, Journal of Peasant Studies, vol. 12, nos 2 and 3
(January-April).
Subbarayalu, Y., 1973, Political Geography of the Chola Country, Madras.
— 1994, ‘Sumatravil Tamil-k-kalvettugal’, Avanam (January).
Subrahmanian, N., 1966, Sangam Polity: The Administration and Social
Life of the Sangam Tamils, Bombay: Asia Publishing House (reprint
1980).
— 1966, Pre-Pallavan Tamil Index (Index of the Historical Material
in Pre-Pallavan Tamil Literature), Madras: University of Madras.
Subrahmaniam, T.N., 1958-9, ‘Pallankovil Jaina Copper Plate Grant
of Early Pallavas’, Transactions of the Archaeological Society of South
India, 41-83.
Sumathi, R., 1984, Trade and its Impact on the Early Tamils—The
Cola Experience, M.Phil Dissertation (unpublished), New Delhi:
Jawaharlal Nehru University.
Sundaram, K., 1968, Studies in Economic and Social Conditions in Medieval
Andhra, Machilipatnam: Triveni Publishers.
Suresh, S., 1991, ‘Roman Vestiges in Kancipuran—An Investigation into
the Early Mediterranean Contacts with the Chingleput Region’,
in Nandita Krishna (ed.), Kanchi-A Heritage of Art and Religion,
Madras: C.P. Ramaswami Aiyar Institute of Indology.
— 1992, ‘Early Archaeological Finds in Karur’, JHC, Proceedings, 52nd
Session, New Delhi.
— 1993, ‘A Study of the Roman Coins and Other Antiquities in
India with Special Reference to South India’, Ph.D. Dissertation
(unpublished), New Delhi: Jawaharlal Nehru University.
Tamil Lexicon, 1982, 6 Volumes and Supplement, University of Madras.
Thakur, Renu, 1994, ‘Urban Hierarchies, Typologies and Classification
in Early Medieval India: 750-1200’, Urban History, 21, pt. 1
(April), Cambridge University Press, 61-76.
Thakur, Vijay Kumar, 1981, Urbanisation in Ancient India, New Delhi:
Abhinav.
Thapar, R., 1973, Asoka and the Decline of the Mauryas, OUP, 2nd
edition.
460 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
— 1982, A History of India, vol. 1, Penguin (reprint).
— ‘State Formation in Early India’, /nternational Social Science Journal,
XXXII.
— 1984, From Lineage to State, Bombay: OUP.
— 1987, ‘Towards the Definition of an Empire: The Mauryan State’,
in The Mauryas Revisited, Calcutta.
— 1987, Cultural Transaction and Early India: Tradition and Patronage,
Delhi: OUP.
— 1992a, ‘Patronage and Community’, in Barbara, Stoler Miller (ed.),
The Powers of Art, Delhi: OUP.
— 1992b, ‘Black Gold: South Asia and the Roman Maritime Trade’,
South Asia (Journal of the South Asian Studies Association),
Armidale NSW, Australia, n.s., vol. xv, no. 2 (December).
Tirumalai, R., 1980, Rajendra Vinnagar, Madras: The Institute of
Epigraphy, Tamil Nadu State Department of Archaeology.
Vanaja, R., 1955, ‘The Madras Museum Collection of Punch-marked
Coins: A Study’, M.Litt Thesis (unpublished), University of
Madras.
Vasudeva Rao, T.N., 1979, Buddhism in the Tamil Country, Chidam-
baram: Annamalainagar.
Vellaivaranan, K., 1972, Panniru Tirumurai Varalaru, pt. 1, Annamalai-
nagar.
Veluthat Kesavan, 1979, ‘The Temple Base of the Bhakti Movement
in South India’, JHC, 40th Session, Waltair, 185-94.
Veluthat, Kesavan, 1993, The Political Structure of Early Medieval South
India, New Delhi: Orient Longman.
Venkat Rao, Gurty, 1982, ‘The Pre-Satavahana and Satavahana Periods’,
in G. Yazdani (ed.), The Early History of the Deccan, pts I to vi, New
Delhi (reprint).
Venkatarama Ayyar, K.R., 1947 (1948), ‘Medieval Trade, Craft and
Merchant Guilds in South India’, Journal of Indian History, xxv,
pts 1-3.
Venkataraman, K.R., 1950, The Hoysalas in the Tamil Country, An-
namalai University, Historical Series, no. 7, Annamalai Nagar.
Venkatasubramanian, T.K., 1982, ‘Growth of Urban Centres in Early
Tamilakam’, JHC, 43rd Session, Kurukshetra.
Venkateswara Rao, T., 1975, Local Bodies in Pre-Vijayanagar Andhra,
Ph.D. Thesis (unpublished), Dharwar: Karnataka University.
Warmington, E.H.,, 1974, The Commerce Between the Roman Empire and
India, Delhi, 2nd edition (Revised and enlarged).
Bibliography J 461
Watt, G., 1966, The Commercial Products of India, New Delhi: Today
and Tomorrow’s Printers and Publishers (reprint).
Watters, T., 1905, On Yuan Chuang’s Travels in India, vol. u.
Webb, M., 1975, ‘The Flag follows Trade—An Essay on the Necessary
Interaction of Military and Commercial Factors in State For-
mation’, in Jeremy A. Sabloff and C.C. Lamberg-Karlovsky (eds),
Anaent Civilization and Trade, Albuquerque.
Weber, M., Economy and Society, New York.
Wheatley, Paul, 1971, The Pivot of the Four Quarters:A Preliminary Enquiry
into the Origins and Character of the Ancient Chinese City, Edinburgh.
— 1972, ‘The Concept of Urbanism’, in PeterJ .U cko, Ruth Tringham
and G.W. Dimbleby (eds), Man, Settlement and Urbanism, Duck-
worth: London, London University.
— 1973, ‘Urban Genesis in Mainland South East Asia’, in R.B. Smith
and W. Watson (eds), Early South East Asta: Essays in Archaeology,
History and Geography, New York, 288-303.
Wheeler, R.E.M., Ghosh A. and Krishna Deva, 1946, ‘Arikamedu: An
Indo-Roman Trading Station on the East Coast of India’, Ancient
India, no. 2 (July).
Wheeler, R.E.M., 1955, Rome Beyond the Imperial Frontiers, London:
Pelican.
Wirth, Louis, 1938, ‘Urbanism as a Way of Life’, American Journal of
Sociology, xuv, no. 1 (July), 1-24.
Yadava, B.N.S., 1978, ‘The Accounts of the Kali Age and the Social
Transition from Antiquity to the Middle Ages’, /ndian Historical
Review, nos 1-2 (July 1978-January 1979).
— 1980, ‘The Problems of the Emergence of Feudal Relations in
Early India’, Presidential Address, Ancient India Section, JHC,
4lst Session, Bombay.
Zvelebil, Kamil, 1973, The Smile of Murugan. On the Tamil Literature of
South India, Leiden: EJ. Brill.
Index
Abrams, Philip 4 Atyapolil (See Ayyavole) 314
Abul Feda 228 Atyapolil Kattar 219, 317
Achchapuram See Mahipalakula- Aiyapolil Parameévari 54, 314
kalapéralam akam 36, 60, 180
Adampakkam 399 Akanagar 127
Adam’s bridge 139 Akananuru 134-5, 179
Adams, Robert McC. 37 akhil 187, 323
Adavallan 431, 434 Akhilanayaka caturvedimanga-
Adayaru 399 lam 341
Adichanallur 124, 190 Alagaimanagaram 316, 325
Adirajamangalyapuram See Alagankulam 105, 133-4, 140
_ Tiruvadigai Alagarai 17
Adi Kumbhe§vara, temple 343 Alagarmalai 123
Aditya I 334, 347, 376 Alagiyacola caturvédimangalam
Advaita 398 _ See Bahur
Agamic 396 Alamporai 131
agaram 341, 344 Alexandria 108, 117, 121
Agastya 43 allangadi 103, 127, 192
Agni 426, 431 Allur 126
agrahara 42, 220, 341 alvar 60-1, 335, 339
Ahavamallakulakalapuram 332 Amaravati 116, 119
Ahicchatra 50, 313
Amaravati (River) 109, 111, 118-
Aihole/Aryapura 48, 50, 313- 19, 137m
14, 316 Amar Niti Nayanar 346
Aihole, Mahagrahara 50, 313 Ambasamudram (Ilangoykkudi)
Aihole, Mahajanas 50 _ 210, 318
Ainntrruva Bhattan 316 Amur K6ottam 380
Ainnurruvan Inban Devan Anaimangalam 351
Cetti 316 Anbil 319
Ainnurruvar 48, 218, 224, 311, Andhra (region) 6, 9-10, 13, 16,
315, 317, 319
25-6, 33-4, 43, 45-7, 51-5,
Ainfurruvar Tirukkavanam
69, 92, 98-100, 107, 110-11,
(grove? of the Five Hundred) 113-16, 124, 130, 134-5, 137,
315
140, 183-4, 195-6, 216-17,
aintinai 95
219, 223, 318, 320, 322, 324,
Aioi 139
326, 356, 374, 388, 399
Index J 463
Andipatti (Cengam) 112 aruvai vantkan 107
angadi 64, 103, 193, 195, 379, Asia 1-2
382, 436-7 Central Asia 26, 180
Angkor 6 South Asia 3, 47, 113, 117,
angadippattam 325 178, 222, 312, 383
Anjuman 49 Southeast Asia 2, 6, 11, 16,
18, 47, 62, 92, 105, 115-
Anjuvannam 48-9, 55, 220, 223,
_ 225, 311-13, 324, 384, 399 16, 129, 175, 178, 180-2,
An Porunai (River) See 184, 187, 191, 193, 214,
Amaravati (River) 222, 312, 323-4, 354, 383,
antai 101 390, 426, 436
antarala 428 West Asia 7, 26, 33, 175,
Antonius Pius 138 178, 312, 323-4, 390
Asoka 109, 120, 130
anuloma rathakaras 56, 229, 322
Anuradhapura 6 Asokan edicts 93, 138
apasmara (ignorance) 434 asta dikpala 64, 426
Appar 396, 434 asura 431
Arab 47, 57, 217, 223, 313, 394 Atan See Ceralatan
Arabia 323 Atiyaman/Atikaiman chiefs 93,
Arachaliir/Arachchalur 119, 316 138, 225
Aragalir 228 Atiyaman Peruvali 225
Aramboli pass 318 altikosattar 314
Arantangi 227 Attiyur 392, 397
Aravamudu 339 Augustus 109, 115, 179
Arcadius 133 Avanakkalam 338
ardhamandapa 427-9 avanam 103
argarik/argaritic 140, 182 Ay 139
Ayirattali (Kandiyur) 332, 338
Argaru 125, 139-40
Ayirattali (Palaiyarai) 348-9
Argeirou 140
Aykkudi 139
Ariake (Arabia) 120
Arikamédu (Virai/Virampatti- Ayyavole 47-8, 50-1, 55, 69,
nam) 17, 29-30, 95, 105, 218, 220-1, 223-4, 229, 311,
108, 114, 132-5, 138, 140, 313-15, 356, 384
182, 188-9, 196 Southern Ayyavole 315
Arisilaru (River) 208, 213, 332-
3, 336, 353 Bacare 105, 108, 139
Bahur (Vagar Alagiyacola Catur-
Arisil Kilar 189
vedimangalam) 212
Arni (River) 373
Arretine Ware 130-1, 134 Ballala II 226
Arthasastra 123-4, 182-3 Bana chieftains 374, 380
Arumolidevisvaram 346 Banajigas 50, 314
Aruppukkottai 224 bananju-dharma 48, 31 1, 314
464 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Bananyu-pattana 52 220-1, 229, 313, 321, 337,
Bania Longifolia 432 350-2, 375-7, 391, 435-6
Barygaza (Bharukaccha) 112, Brahmi (script) 34, 114, 117,
121, 179, 185, 189 119, 124, 126, 133, 135, 137-
Basinikonda (Siravalli) 219, 8
317, 384 Brhadisvara temple See
Bauddhapalli 398 Rajarajesvaram
Bay of Bengal 115, 124 Buddha, the 429
Belgaum 46 Buddhism 14-15, 18, 33, 60-1,
Bengal 113, 116, 124, 134, 191 99-100, 109, 195, 395, 431
Bérikai 225 Hinayana Buddhism 99
berullos 183 Mahayana Buddhism 99
Bettigo 139 Buddhist 11, 14-15, 35, 37, 51,
bhakti 40, 60-2, 65, 102, 207, 99, 101, 107-9, 114-15, 119-
222, 371, 378, 395-7, 399, 20, 126, 128, 130, 135, 175,
424-6, 430-1, 434, 437 185, 195, 222, 333, 348, 356,
bhakti mathas 385 390-1, 395-6, 398
Bhakti Movement 207, 396 Theravada Buddhists 51, 222
bhandara 40
Burma (Pagan) 56, 131, 182,
Bharatanatya Karana 339 222,383
Bhavani (taluk) 226 Byzantine 111, 132
Bhumiputra 54, 388
Bijapur 48, 313 Caitya 120, 128
Black and Red Ware/BRW 93, Cakrapani temple 343-4, 354
118, 124-5, 127-9, 130-7, Cakravarti/n 53, 70, 326, 429
332-3
Calukyas (Eastern) 383
Braudel, Fernand 2, 4 Calukyas (Western) 315, 347,
Black Slipped Ware 130 395, 428, 432
Black Ware 125
Camara 105, 126, 140, 179, 191
Bodinaikkanur 112, 123 Cambodia 222
Brahma 43, 431, 434 Candésa 427
Brahmadesam (Ennayiram)
Candéévara 427, 431, 435-6
210
Candesvara shrine 427
brahmadeya 17, 38-43, 45, 58, 60, Cannanore 105, 120, 139
62, 66, 204, 206-8, 210-12, Canror 30-1, 97
216, 334-6, 350, 352, 356-7, Canton inscription 318
375-9, 388, 392, 396, 400 Cape Comorin (Comari,
brahmahatya 434
Kanyakumari) 139
brahma-ksatriya 39, 43 Carigatkkottai 70
brahmana 7, \\-12, 17, 27, 32, Carter, Harold 7
38-40, 42, 56, 59-60, 71, 96- Catan 117
7, 109, 175, 206, 208-9, 218, Cattu 106, 193
Caturvedi 313 Chingleput 132-3, 211, 219,
Celadon Ware 126 226, 317, 374, 384
Cempu-ceytkunar 106 Chintapalle inscription 324
Centan 112 _ Chittoor 219, 316-17, 374, 384
Cengam See Andipatti Chryse island 121
Cenganan Cola 332 Cilat Cettis 55, 228, 321, 394
Central America 5 Cirrambar 44
Céra 16, 26-9, 32-3, 93-5, 98- cire perdue (lost wax process) 355
100, 107, 109, 111-12, 118- Citttramelt/Citraméli 53-4, 56,
20, 123, 137, 179-80, 183-4, 220-1, 312, 319-20, 325, 387-
186, 190-1, 196, 205, 210- 9
11, 332, 390, 424, 432 Cittirameli Pertya Nadu 53, 219-
Céra Nadu 28 20, 312, 320, 387
Céra Kotai 118 Cittiramelt prasasti 54, 220, 388
Ceralatan 119 Cittiravalt 314
Céraman Perumal 434-5 Claudius 119
Ceravanmahadevi-caturvedi- Coelobothros 120
mangalam (Sermadév1) 38, Coimbatore 28-9, 30, 46, 53, 70,
66, 211, 227 95, 112, 114-15, 136, 178,
183, 187-8, 190, 223, 225-8,
Cen 379
Cerobothra 139 319, 326, 394
Cettiyar/Chettiyar 45, 349, 383 Céla 16, 26-8, 30, 33, 37-8, 41,
44-7, 51-5, 57-8, 61-8, 70,
Ceyon See Murukan
Chahamana 13 72, 93-4, 98-100, 104-5, 111,
Champa (Indo-China) 116 115, 117-18, 125-9, 180, 182,
Chau-Ju-Kua 228 184, 186, 190-2, 196, 203-32,
Chayavana 349 313, 315-19, 321, 323, 326,
Chettinad 224 331-41, 343, 345-50, 352-5,
Cheyyar (River) 374-5, 377 371, 373-84, 387-400, 424-30,
Chidambaram 66, 212, 227, 435-7
231-2, 352, 356, 435, 437 Cola mandalam 332, 371, 384,
China 2, 7, 47, 115-16, 131,
432, 436
180-1, 184, 187, 213, 222-3, Cola mandalamuna Vyapari 318
312, 318, 324, 383, 426 Cola Nadu 29, 378, 390
Hang of China 48, 311 Célapandya pattinam (Ghanta-
Shang of China 5 sala) 219, 318
Sung of China 48, 311 Cola Silpacarya Rajaraja perum-
Yuan of China 48, 311
taccan 428
Chinese 5-6, 130-1, 222-3, 390, Colchi 124, 139-40, 191
Coptos 121
394
P’ing, Emperor of China Coromandel coast 121, 191,
222, 385
131
466 fe Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Coromandel ports 179-80 déevaraja 62, 436
Coromandel textiles 228 Devipattinam 70
Cosmos Indicopleustus 185 Dhanuskoti/Koti 140
Cottanara (Kuttanadu) 120-1, Dharmapuri 138, 225, 228
139, 186 dikpala shrines 427
Cranganore See Kodungallur Dindigul 186
Cuddalore (Nissankamallan Dipankudi 345
pattinam) 105, 213, 230 Divyaprabandham 336, 339
Ctdamani Varma Vihara 349 Dodballapur 315
Cuddapah 183 Domitian 138
Culli (River) 186 Draksharama 318
Cunnattar 106 dravida 61, 63, 396, 425
Curralai 427 Durga 429
Dvaraka 389
Daksinaméru 64, 426-7 dvarapala 347, 428
Daksinaméru Vitankar 64, 426, Dvarasamudra 315
431 duitala vimana 427
Daksinamurti 429-30, 433-4
Damirica 121, 139 ebargareitides 140
dana (gift) 12 Egypt 48, 121, 179, 182, 312
Danmadavala matha 385 Eisenstadt, S.N. 3, 8, 93
Danmapolil 314 Elangkon 105
Dantivarman Pallava 392 Eliade, Mircea 8
Darasuram temple 346-7 Elupattonpadu nadu 388
Darukavana myth 433 Ennayiram See Brahmadesam
Dayamukhamangalam 334 entai 31
Deccan (the) 6, 9-10, 13, 16, 25- Epiodoros 140
6, 33-5, 50, 69, 92, 98-100, ért 375
107, 109, 137, 176, 183, 193- Envira 219, 314
6
Envirappattana 52, 70, 210, 215-
denarii 110 16, 218-19, 225-6, 314, 317-
Desi Uyyakkonda pattana 18, 324, 356, 384
(Motupalli) 219, 226 Erode 55, 95, 100, 135-6, 225,
devadana 206-7, 336, 338, 346, 228-9, 319, 321
352, 356, 378, 380, 391, 400 Europe 48, 67, 72, 108, 194,
Devadanam See Kulasékhara- 205, 231
puram
Eyil Kottam 391
devakostha 428
Devakula 433
Fa Hsien 11
Dévanga 227 Filliozat, J. 108, 194
Devaradévar 432 Finley, M.I. 67
devaradtyar 381, 386
Fried, Morton 6
Index / 467
gahapati 100-1 Hampi 72
Gajalaksmi 429 Hanjumana 49
Ganapati 427 Harappan/Indus Valley Culture
Gandaraditya 425, 431 8, 25
Harihara 429
Ganésa 429
Gangaikondacolapuram 61, 63, hatta 12
65, 208, 217, 319, 344, 348, Himalayas 183, 187
350-2, 356, 383, 424-5, 427, Hippalus 113, 179
Hirtya matha See Vira Saiva
429, 437
Gangapadi/Gangavadi 45, 216, matha
Hosur 225
226, 432
Gangas 51, 316-17 Houang-tche 131, 390
Ganges 9-10, 11-12, 16, 25-6, 50, Hoysalas 70-1, 226, 315, 392
92, 112, 116, 181, 184, 437 Hsuan Tsang 11, 130, 390
Hungund 313
Gangetic nard 121
Ganjam 318
Idai nadu 392
garbhagrha 355
Gatana (River) 38, 210 Idaivali See Tirumalagandarkko-
Gavundas 392 ttal
Idangai 56, 229, 321, 387
Geographia (of Ptolemy) 105
Ghantasala See Cola pandya pat- Iksvaku 9, 15
ilaiya kunjira mallar 340
tinam
Godavari (River) 183 ilakkasu 350
Golaki matha (Golla matha) [lam See Sri Lanka
[lamandalam 432
210, 385
Gopinatha Perumalkoyil 347 [lam Peruvaludi, Kadalul
Goppayyadéva Maharaja 349 Mainta 180
gopura 68, 336, 343, 349, 427 Ilamtiraiyan 131-2
Greek 113, 120-1, 124, 176, Ilancingam 314
178, 180, 183-5, 191, 194 Ilangoykkudi See
Ambasamudram
Greek cites 67
ilicinar 31, 97
Greek Traders 108
Imayavaramban Neduncéralatan
Grhya (texts) 12
Gujarat 34, 92, 113, 136, 179, 179
Indian Ocean 185
183
Gulf of Mannar 124
Indo-Aryan 43
Indo Greeks 109
Gupta 11
Indra 426
Gurjara Pratihara 12
Indra vila (festival of Indra)
117, 128
Hall, Kenneth R. 50, 59, 67,
204-5, 213-14, 219, 231,
Indrapala, K. 312
Indra vihara 120
313, 432
468 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Indus (region) 9 Kailasa 434
Innambar nadu 341 Kailasamangalam See Karisulnda-
Irukkuvel chiefs 51, 223-4, 317 mangalam
Irumporai 119 Kakandi 126
Isana 426 Kakkaippadiniyar Naccellaiyar
istadevata 430 189
Isthmus of Kra 214, 222 kal 428
Kalabhras (Kali arasar) 37, 333
Jagannatha of Puri 62, 436 kdlagam 182
Jain 37, 54, 100, 107-8, 119-20, kalam 116
126, 138, 175, 195, 22352a8s kalam karai ilangu cudar (Light
317, 333, 339-40, 345, 390-2, house) 181
395-6, 398-9 Kalamukhas 385, 398, 400
kalanju 112, 189, 337-8, 340,
Jainism 18, 33, 60-1, 100-1, 130,
195, 395, 431 350
Jajmani 11 Kalattir Kottam 212, 380
Jalasayana temple 339 Kalinga 182, 395
Jambai 138 kalingam pakamar 106, 182
janapada 26-7, 98, 112
Kaliyuga/Kali age 11-12, 17
Jananatha Caturvédimangalam Kalladam 431
See Villupuram kal-nodav-attiyar 106
jati 43, 109, 377 kalpavrksa (wish giving tree)
Java 115, 222 128
Jayankondacolamandalam 318, Kalugumalai 345
338, 373, 388, 424, 432 Kalyanapura 347
Jewish traders 49, 313 Kalyani 315
Jina-Kafict 391-2, 398
Kamaksi temple 129-30, 398
Kambatta-Visvanatha temple
Kacci (Kaccimurram, Kacci- 353
ppédu) 29, 65, 94, 129, 131, Kambuja 436
212, 390
Kampavarman 376
Kacciyarayar 344 Kammala/Kanmalar 56, 228-9,
Kadagattur 228
322
kadainar 106 Kampulu 53-4
kadam 225 Kamudi 224
Kadambas 391 Kanakkal Irumporai 332
Kadaram 348 kanam 112, 189
Kadava 341 Kanan 117
kadigattavalam 56, 224, 324 Kanara 49
Katkkolas 71, 209, 211, 221, kanca-karar 106
321, 324, 337, 350, 354, 385- Kancanur See Simhavisnu catur-
7, 393-4, 397 vedimangalam
Kanci/Kaficipuram (Kaficimana- Kaveri (River)/(Delta)/(Valley)
garam, Kancinallir) 15, 17- 26-7, 30, 38, 44, 63, 94, 118,
18, 38, 44, 52, 59, 61, 65-7, 128-9, 136, 183, 190, 192,
71-2, 95, 111, 115, 120, 129- 206, 208, 213, 223, 226, 230,
33, 188, 205, 212-14, 227, 316-18, 331-3, 336, 351-2,
230-2, 319, 321, 333, 351, 374, 382, 399, 425
356, 371, 373-5, 377, 379, Kavéripumpattinam (Puhar) 17,
381-5, 389, 391-401, 437 26, 28-9, 32, 49, 94, 100,
Kanci Ghatikasthana 212, 391 103-6, 108, 111, 116-17, 120-
Kancikkivalnadu 228, 322 2, 125-9, 134, 140, 178-81,
Kandiyar See Ayirattali 183, 186, 189, 191-3, 195,
Kangéya nadu 229, 322 216, 224, 230, 334, 352, 384
Kanjamalai 136 Kavérippumpattinattu Ponvani-
Kannada 315 kanar Makanar Nappudanar
Kannaki 122
107
Kapalikas 400 kaviti 195
Kapardisvara 340 Kayal 124, 230, 325
Karaikkadu 132, 188 Kayal pattinam 323
Karaikkal 353 Kayavarohana 336
Karavandapuram (Uk- Kayavoy 181
kirankotta1) 44, 69, 318 Kerala 16, 26, 34, 47, 49, 92,
kari 185 111, 113, 120, 136, 179, 181,
Karikala Cola 125, 132, 180, 191 209, 211, 217, 223, 225, 228,
Karimi (of Egypt) 48, 311 313, 317-18, 326, 337, 341,
Karistlndamangalam (Kailasa- 353, 389, 394, 435
mangalam, Ten Tiruvénga- Keralaputra 120
dam) 211 Khaberis (Puhar) 105, 126, 140,
Karnataka 34, 45-8, 50-5, 71,
179, 191
Khutba 70
100, 183, 187, 189-90, 216,
219, 221, 225, 227-8, 313,
Kidarankondacélapuram See
Punyjai
315-16, 320, 322-3, 325-6,
hilan/kilar 31, 97, 101
388, 392
Karur/Karuvar 100, 111, 118- Kilar Kdrram 338
kilavan 31
20, 228
Kilaiyur 127
Karuvur Dévar 427, 433
Kasi Visvanatha temple 336, kilor 97
343
Kildr (Tirukk6valur) 213-14
kasu 112, 189, 350 kinnara 434
Kathiawar 183
Klong Thom (inscription) 116
Kattur 384
Koéccengannan 425
Kavanam (hall) 351 kodat 97
hédatyar 106
Kavanapalli 225
470° y, Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
kodu-cudu-nurrinar 106 Korura (Karur) 118
Kory (Dhanuskoti) 140
Kodumanal (Kodumanam) 29,
109, 111, 119, 135-7, 182-5, Kotai (Céra title) 119
kottam 41, 44, 213-14, 374-6,
189
Kodumbalur 49, 51, 223-4, 317, 378, 380-2, 388, 391-2, 399-
325, 384 400
Kodumbaltr Manigramam 49, Kottayam 105, 139, 184,
218, 226, 313, 316 186
Kodungallir (Cranganore) 118, Kotttr nadu 399
120 Kovalam See Viracélapattinam
Kolandtaphonta 116 Kovalan 120, 122
Kolar 110 Kovalur See Tirukkoyilir
Kolkhoi (Korkai) 105 Kovilpatti 319, 323
Kollam See Quilon koyil 66, 433 4
Kollidam (Coleroon) (River) Koyil Kandadai Nayan Alvar
63, 19Zj5aeaZ5 Jiyar 344
Kolli hills 119 Koyil Tévarayanpettai 318
Kollippurai 112, 119 koyirramar 62, 435
kolu vanikan 107 Krishna (River) 34
koman 124 Krishnan, K.G. 320
Konadu 224 Krsna 65, 389
Kongavalar 437 Krsna III 316
Kongavalar angadi 64 Krsnadévaraya 343
Kongavalar Virakkotiyar 314 ksatrtya 7, 17, 38-9, 42-3, 60,
Kongu (region) 16, 28, 34, 45- 375, 391
6, 51, S3pvaea il, 114, 119y Kidal 65
136, 138, 190, 225-6, 228, Kudal Alagar 65
314, 316-19, 321-2, 384, 394, Kudalur See Pallavanpattinam
424
Kudamukku See Kumbhak6nam
Kongu Colas 228-9, 322 Kudamukku-Palaiyarai 38, 58,
Kongu Pandyas 228-9, 322 66, 208, 232, 331, 334-5, 342,
Konkan 139 345, 350, 356, 437
Kopperunjinga 341 kudamula 431
Korkai (Colchi) 17, 29, 38, 44, Kudandai Kilkkéttam 335
kudi 95
94, 105, 123-4, 134, 139,
184, 191, 196, 230, 325 kudirai cettis 47, 326, 341
Korkai Vendu 124 Kulasekharapuram (Devadanam,
Korra Colas 332 Kulasekharappattinam) 225,
Korramangalam 319 324-5
Korrangudi 341 Kuldttunga I 51, 215-17, 219,
Korravai 101
222-3, 226, 318, 348-9, 382-
Kortallaiyar (River) 373 3, 385-6, 393, 395
Index x 471
Kuldttunga II 397, 425 Machlipatnam 115
Kulottunga Colan pattinam See madakkoyil 427
Visakhapattinam madam 427
Kumaramarttandapuram madanika (female figure) 347
(Tirunagesvaram) 44, 208, madappalli 344
210, 213, 334-6, 339-40, madigai (maligai) 70
345, 350, 353-4 Madras 2-3, 52, 105, 230, 350,
Kumbhakonam (Kudamukku, 371, 373, 384, 400
Kudandai, Kudandaivayil, Madurai 2, 18, 29, 34, 38, 44,
Kudavayil, Kudavayirk6ttam) 61, 65-6, 71, 94-5, 100, 103-
208-11, 227, 232, 331-40, 4, 106, 111-12, 115, 122-3,
342-4, 347-8, 350-5 182, 186, 193, 195, 206, 223,
kumbhaltkas 312 226-7, 229, 317, 333, 356,
Kumbhamela of Prayaga 343 371, 390, 396, 398
Madurai Aruvai Vanikan
kumbhapanjara 428
KumbheSvara temple 338, 343, Ilavéttanar 107, 193
345 Maduratkkana 104, 122-3, 134,
Kundavai 432 189
Madurai Killa Vanikan Sittalai
Kunnattur 17, 182, 190
kunt etirppat 102
Sattanar 107
hurinci 27-8, 30, 36, 96, 101, Madurai Olaikkadaiyattar
Nalvellaiyar 107
103, 374
Kurnool 183
Madurantaka caturvédimanga-
lam (Madurantakam) 67,
kurram 40-1, 425
Kurruva Nayanar 435 131, 133, 211-12, 379
Kurumbar 316, 374 maganmai 53, 217, 220, 319, 389
Mahabalipuram See Mamalla-
Kusana 113, 433
puram
Kuttuvan 186
Kuttuvan Kotai 112, 137 Mahajanas 313
Mahamakam tank 343
Kuvirian 137
mahamandalesvara 349
Laos 116
Mahanddu 71, 227, 321, 394
mahanagarattar (of
Laksadhyayi lineages 385
Kancipuram) 392-3
Laksmana 344
Lakuliga Pandita 346
Mahdnavami ceremony 72
Leiden Grant (Smaller) 222 Maharashtra 139
Mahendramangalam 334
Lewandowski, Susan 2
linga 61
Mahendravarma Pallava 130,
334, 391
Lingodbhava 429-30
Loboe Tiwa (inscription)
Mahipalakulakalapéralam
(Achchapuram) 231
(Barus) 56, 322-3
Mahodayapuram See Makkotai
Lokavibhaga 130
472 J Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Mailarpha/Mailarphan/Manar- 128, 214, 218, 220, 224-6,
pha (Mayilappur) 105, 399 311-12, 322, 324, 326, 384,
Makkotai (Mahodayapuram) 399
111, 118-19, 137 manikkuyinar 106
Mal 60, 131 manikuytrrunar 184
Malabar 184-7 Manimekalai 17, 33, 100, 103,
Malabathrum 186 107, 115, 120, 126, 130, 177,
Malacca straits 180 194-5, 390
Malaimandalam 47, 217, 316, Manipallavam 115
326, 341-2, 394 manty-vannakkan 107, 184
Malainadu 64, 337, 432 Mankulam 123
Malaipatukatam 112 Mannaikondacolapattinam See
Malaiyalangudi 217 Tirukkarugavur
Malaiyalar 342 Mannar 140
Malaiyaman chiefs 112, 138 Mannargudi 70
Malaya 115, 180 Mannarkoyil See Rajarajacatur-
Malaysia 222, 348 vedimangalam
Maligai Mélaikkallari 341 manradi 209, 337, 342
Mali Fatan 70 Mara 188
Mallai See Mamallapuram Marakkala nayakan 323
Maloney, C. 108, 176 Marakkanam 105, 140, 230-1,
Malur-patna See Nigarili 385
colapuram Maravar 219
Mamallapuram (Mallai, Maha- Marungur pattinam 134
balipuram) 38, 44, 105, 131- marutam 16, 18, 26-7, 30-1, 33,
a, 213, 230, Sigeery, 381, 36, 38, 93, 95-6, 101-3, 177,
390, 392, 396, 399 195, 374
Mamandiur 130 Maruvirpakkam 103, 127, 134,
Mambalam 131, 399 192
Managar 127 Masalia 115, 140
managaram 44, 52, 213-15, 232, Masattuvan 32, 193, 195
319, 379, 383-4, 390 Masi Magha festival 343
Manali 400 Matangari Vallava Desi Uyyak-
Manavirappattinam (Tiruchen- konda Pattinam 323
dur) 44 matha 210-11, 324, 344-5, 349-
mandalam 45, 64, 373, 383, 424, 50, 381, 384-5, 397
436 Mathura 433
mandapa 68, 324, 344, 351 Mattavilasa Prahasana 130, 390
Mandara (mountain) 431 Mauryas 6
Mangalore 105, 120 Mauryan 6, 9-10, 16, 26, 34-5,
mani (gem) 183-4 92-3, 98, 110, 114, 124
Manigramam 48-9, 51, 53, 127, pre-Mauryan 34
Index J 473
post-Mauryan 93 Mudikonda-Célamandalam 45,
Mavilankai (Tindivanam) 95 216, 424
Mayamoha (Visnu) 431 Mudikondacdlappéraru 210
Mayilai See Mayilappur Mudikondan
Mayilappur (Mayilarppil) 52, (Mudikondacdlapuram/Desi
105, 225, 228, 230, 350, 353, Uyyakkondapattana) 46, 51,
384-5, 392, 394, 399 55, 225s 217, 332,
Mayilatt: 383 348
Mudikondan (River) 208, 332,
Mayon 101
Medtkuru 54 336, 345
Mediterranean 16, 33, 92, 111, mudur 28, 131
121, 134, 175, 178 mulabhrtya 427, 431, 435
Meenachilar (River) 139 Mulaiyur 345
Megalithic 10, 93, 98, 110, 113- miulaparisad (mUlaparuda1) 332,
14, 124-5, 131, 136-7, 188, 337, 340
mullai 28, 30, 36, 40, 96, 101-3,
333, 374
Meipporulnayanar (Miladudai- 374
Mulli nadu 66, 318
yar) 431
Melange (Mavilanka1) 105
Mummudicélamandalam 64
méli 312 Munaivirar 314
Meéli Sastravaru 54 Munisandai 218, 316
Muniyur/Munniyur 352
Melkote 183, 397
Manrukai Mahasénai 210, 219
meélor 97
menpulam 96
Murukan (Céyon) 60, 101
meru 64
Muslim traders 49, 70, 313
Meso-America 37
Muttam (Pérdr) 53, 226, 326
Mesopotamia 5, 7, 37 Muttaraiyar 63, 334, 425
Miladudaiyar See Meipporul- muttu (mukta) 182, 184
mutturru kudrram 41
nayanar
muvar (of Tevaram) 431
milecca 109, 122
Mirai Kurram 338 Mia Vendar 94, 98
Muvéenda velar 380
mithuna 119
Modakkir inscription 228 Muziris (Muciri) 105, 109, 114,
120-1, 139, 179, 184
Mohenjo-daro 9
Mysore 46, 225, 397
moksa 60
Motupalli See Desi Uyyakonda
Naddula (Nadol) 13
pattana
Nadu 204
Muciri 27, 29, 94, 105, 118,
120-1, 136, 139, 178-9, 186, nadu 40-1, 44-5, 53, 204, 213-
191, 196 15, 312, 320, 325, 336, 375-
7, 382, 388, 392, 432
Mudalis 386
Naduvil nadu 378
pradhana mudalis 392
474 r. Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Naganatha temple (in Tirunages- Nathankoyil 345
varam) 340 Nattamédu 17
Nagappattinam 51-2, 129, 214, nattar 204, 387-8
222, 230-1, 318-19, 349, 351- Nattukkottai 45
3, 356 Nattukkottai Chettiars 313
nagarakkanakku 325 Naura (Cannanore) 105, 139
nagaram 41, 43-9, 51-3, 56, 58, Navartavalam 225
63, 67-8, 203-4, 206, 208, navay 116
210-11, 213-17, 221, 224-6, Navukkarasar (Appar) 350
228, 231-2, 312-13, 319-20, Nayakas 66, 71, 336, 344, 349-
322, 325-6, 334, 340, 378-81, 50, 353-5
383-6, 389, 392-4, 399-400, nayanar 61, 335, 339-40, 342,
432, 436 424-5, 432, 434
nagarattar 5, 45, 311, 313, 316, neital 16, 18, 26-7, 31, 33, 36,
350-1, 354, 378, 393-4, 400, 95-6, 98, 101-2, 106, 177,
437 192, 374
Nagaswamy, R. 430-1 Nelcynda/Neacyndon/Nelkunda/
Nagesvara temple (in Melkynda 105, 120-1, 139,
Kumbhakonam) 336-9, 348 184, 186
nalangadi 103, 127, 192 Neliin Ur 134
Nallur nadu 341 Nellur 374, 389, 394
Nallur Tirupperumanam 231 Nellur Pudu Madai 383
Nambi Andar Nambi 434 Nerkunram 227
Nanayakkara Chetti Street 354
Nero 115, 138
Nandanmédu 332-3, 347 Netuman Afici 138
Nandaputras 389 Netunalvatai 122-3
Nandi, R.N. 12 nidu kadi ilatyinar 106
nandipada 119
nigama 32, 100, 137, 195
Nandipuram 208, 232, 332, Nigarilicolapuram (Malir-patna)
342, 345-6, 348, 350, 354 46, 216
Nandipura Vinnagaram 346 Nigarilicola Vinnagaram 211
Nandivarman II (Pallavamalla) Nilakanta Sastri, K.A. 118
333-4, 346
Nile (River) 121
Nandivarman III 333, 350 Nirpeyarru/Nirpayarrurai/
Nannan 112
Nirpper 29, 95, 107, 131-3,
Nannilam 227, 345 189, 374, 389
Nard (Nardus, Narantam, Cym- Nirrti 426
bopogan Nardus) 187 Nissankamallan pattinam See
Narrinai 135, 189 Cuddalore
Narttamalai (Nagarattarmalai) Nisumbasiidhani 425
224, 325 Nitra 139
natakasalai 351
Nitrias 120, 139
Index it 475
Nodiyur 229, 322 Palar (River) 95, 132, 213, 316-
Nolamba 225 17, 374-3757, ,39 0
North Arcot 32, 53, 112, 183, Palghat (pass) 95, 111, 114,
212-13, 317, 374, 387 116, 136, 184
Northern Black Polished Ware pali 138
(NBP) 124, 133-4 Palk Bay 140, 190
Pallankoyil (copper plates) 130,
notuttal 102
Noyyal, R. 29, 136-7, 183 391
Nrpatunga 376 Pallava 16, 37-9, 41-4, 57, 59-
Nulambapadi 64, 432 60, 62, 65, 129-30, 133, 206,
208, 212-14, 227, 230, 333-
4, 347, 350, 371, 374-6, 381-
Odugattur 182
Oesvalas (Oswals) Uesavala 2, 390-2, 395-6, 399, 424,
jfatiya 13, 49 428
Okkalu 53-4, 320 Pallavanesaram 128
Olagapuram 227 Pallavanr sttinam (Kudalur) 230
Orange Slipped Ware 130 Pallavaram (Pallavapuram) 399
Orissa 62, 114, 318, 395, 436
Pallavarayanpettai inscription
Orriytran 400 348
Ostracon (inscriptions) 117 pallicandam 392
pallippadat 346
Oviyar chiefs 95
palli 339, 345
padaiyur/padaividu 348 Pambur nadu 336, 338, 342
Padi 400 panar 97, 181
padikam (patikam) 189, 432, 436 Panicalas 312
Padinenbhumi (Padinen Visaya) Pancavanmahadevi 346
53, 312, 319-20, 325-6, 388
Pandimandalam 371, 384
Padiyur 136, 183
Pandi nadu 318, 378, 390, 432
Padmanabha of Tiruvanan- Pandion 139
tapuram 62, 436
Pandippadai 348
Pandya 16, 26-9, 32-4, 37-9, 41-
Pagan See Burma
4, 46, 51-3, 57, 59-60, 62-3,
pahn 116, 127
65-6, 69-71, 93-4, 98-100,
Paiyampalli 189
107, 111-12, 115-17, 121-3,
Paiyur kottam 400
133-4, 139, 180, 182, 184,
pakarnar 106, 195
pal 336 186, 188-91, 196, 205-6,
Palaesimundu 140 208, 210-11, 216, 219, 223-5,
palai 96, 101 227, 229, 316, 319-21, 323,
Palaiyarai 52, 65, 208-9, 225, 326, 333-4, 338, 341, 347,
232, 331-3, 335, 345-9, 354, 349-50, 371, 379-80, 383-6,
390, 394, 396, 424, 428, 432
425
(Kil-p-) Palaiyarai 346
Pangala-nadu 374
476 4 Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
panita vanikan 107 Pennar, South (Pennaiyar) 138
Pan Kou 131 peralam 231
Papinayakanahalli 225 perangadi 69, 379
parades 50 Periplus Maris Erythrae 105, 112,
Paraga nagaram 46, 217, 326 115-16, 120-1, 124, 126, 135,
paratya 42 138, 140, 179, 181-2, 185,
Parakésari Cola 351 187-9, 191, 194
Paralia 139 Pertya nadu 204-5, 387
Paramesvaravinnagaram 396 Pertya Puranam 343, 346, 396,
Parantaka I (Viracola) 211, 215, 425, 433-5
332, 337-8, 342, 347-8, 376, Periyar (River) 26, 94
382, 400 Perumbanappadi 374
Parasikas (Persians) 217 Perumpanarruppatai 131-2, 391
paratavar 32, 104, 106-7, 132, perunagarattar 339
181, 192 Perundurai 135
Paripatal 60 peru-nir-occunar 107
parivara 436 Perur See Muttam
parivara (shrines) 427 pérur 28, 374
Pariyur (inscription) 228 Peruvalutiy See Valuti
Parthians 180 Peutingerian tables 179
Parvati 434
pidagai 378
pasumpai 312 Pidari 342
Pasupata 346, 385, 398 Kala Pidari temple 342
Patirruppattu 118-19, 135, 179, Pilavayil 132
183, 189 Pillaiyarpatti See
Pattalmadai 211
Rajanarayanapuram
pattanappagudi 53, 220, 319, 389 Pink Ware 133
pattana (pattina) 28, 56, 192, Piranmalai 53, 224, 319, 323-6
224, 232, 317, 323-4, 388 Pliny 108, 139, 179, 187, 194
pattanasvami 52, 325 Podikai (Potikai) 135, 139, 428
Pattasalins See Saliyas Podiyil hills 211
Pattinappakkam 103, 127, 134, Poduke (Poduce, Poduca,
192
Podouke) 95, 105, 134, 140
Pattinappalai 105, 108, 116, 122,
Polanyi, Karl 192
126, 129, 180-1, 183, 186, Polonnaruva 51, 318
189, 191, 194
pon 112, 189
Pattisvaram 346, 349, 354 Pondicherry 95, 134, 140, 212,
pattu 181
230
Pattukkottai 222 pon kollar 184
Pattunulkaras 349, 354 Ponmialigaittufjinadévar 432
Pattuppattu 103, 106, 122, 192 Ponnaiyar (River) 213
pavai vilakku 188
Ponnani (River) 139, 186
Index J 477
ponsey-kollan 189 Puranas \\
pon vanikan 107, 189 Puranic (tradition) 12, 36, 38,
Ponvannattandad: 435 59-62, 176, 378, 391, 395-8
pirnaghata 133
Porai See Irumporai
Poraiyar 119 Pusankudi (Radhapuram) 227
Porakad (Bacare) 105, 139 Pusya (a star) 351
Poygai Alvar 396 puvinar 106
prakara 68
Quilon (Kollam) 186, 394
prasasti (eulogy) 51, 220, 312,
Quseir-al-Qadim 117
315, 319, 324, 388
pratima 434
Praudhadeva Maharaya 349 Radhapuram See Pusankudi
Ptolemy 95, 105, 115, 118, 126, Raghava Iyengar, M. 118
135, 139-40, 179, 183, 191, Raghunath a Nayaka 344
Rahman, Abdur 70
399
Pudukkottai 34, 45, 47, 51, 54, Raichu:-Bellary plateau 189
100, 178, 188, 216-18, 223- Rajadhiraja I 347, 393
5, 316-17, 319, 324, 384, 388 Rajadhiraja II 348
Puduppattinam 230 Rajanarayanapuram
Pugaliydr (Pukalur) 119, 316 (Pillaiyarpatti) 225
Puhar See Kaveripumpattinam Rajarattha 318
Pulal kottam 399-400 Rajaraja I (Arumolideva) 62-3,
Pulam-Peyarmakkal 193 215-16, 222, 317-18, 338,
Pulankuricci 38 341, 346, 348, 373, 375, 377-
8, 381-2, 393, 425, 428-35
pulavar 97, 110
Pulicat See Tiruppalatvanam Rajaraja II 347-8
Puliyar kottam 399 Rajaraya II] 341
Rajarajacaturvédimangalam
Pullar See Salem
Punch Marked Coins (PMC) (Mannarkoyil) 38, 66, 210
Rajaraja Pandimandalam 424
112, 123, 136, 157
Rajarajapura See Talakkadu
Pindamalli 399
Piindurai nadu 229, 322 RajarajeSvara 65
Rajarajesvaram (Brhadisvara
Punyai
temple) 347, 425-7
(Kidarankondacolapuram)
229; 322 Rajarajesvara Nataka 64, 426
Rajarajapperaru 210
Punnata 183
puram 232, 378, 399-400 Rajarajan tiruvasal 427
puram (collections) 36, 60, 98, Rajasimha III 69
Rajasimha Pallava 132
180
Puramale Nad 225 Rajasthan 13, 49
rajasuya 99
purambadi 63, 436
Purananuru 118, 179, 188 Rajéndra I 62, 67, 210, 215-16,
478 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Sailendra king 222
222-3;:22Eane, 332, 338;
Saiva 66, 71, 211-12, 222, 331,
340-1, 346, 348, 357, 377,
382, 425, 427-8, 437 335-6, 339-40, 342-3, 345-6,
Rayéndra If 340, 387 349-50, 381, 385, 391, 396-9,
Rajéndracola Cittiraméli 424, 433, 435
Saivism 60-1, 336, 346, 390,
Perukkalar 53
Rajéndracolapuram 46, 210-11 395, 397, 400, 430-1
Rajéndranpettai 353 Saivacarya 346
Rama 344 Saiva Siddhanta 71, 397
Ramanathan Koéyil 346 Sakas 109, 113
Ramanathapuram 45, 51, 53, Sakta pitha 398
133, 184, 216, 218, 223-4, Sakti 342
315-17, 319, 323-4, 388 Salai 351
Ramanuja 345, 397 Salem (Pullur) 28, 136, 138,
Ramasvami temple 343-4 183, 187, 216, 223, 225-6,
Ramesvaram 140 228, 319, 326, 394
Rastrakuta 316-17, 395, 430 Saltyas (Pattasdlin) 71, 211, 321,
Ratnagiri See Sivayam 385, 387, 393
Redfield, Robert2 , 372 Saltya nagaram 46, 326, 382,
Red Sea 113, 116-17, 121 386, 400
Red Ware 125-6
Saltya nagarattdar 55, 217, 227,
Roman 11, 30, 32, 103, 108-13, 324
115, 118-19, 123-4, 131-8, Saliyar (Salour) 105, 133, 140
140, 178-9, 181-3, 185, 188- Samanta Pandasali 53, 55, 220,
9, 191, 194, 223, a2, 317, 225, 324
390
samaya(m) 48, 311, 325, 384
Rome 117, 180, 184-5, 193 Samaya Cakravarti 53, 226, 326
Rouletted Ware 124, 128, 130-4 Sambandar (Tirujfianasamban-
Rudra Satakarni 130 dar) 343, 346, 350, 434
Russet Coated Painted Ware Sambhuvarayas 380, 386, 389
(RCP) 125, 136 Sampapati (See Kaveripum-
pattinam) 126
Sabha 39-40, 45, 58, 60, 64, 332, Sandhara Prasada 427
350, 376, 380, 383, 392, 400, Sangam 26-7, 29, 31, 33-4, 36,
432
38-9, 59, 93-5, 100, 103, 105-
Sabouras 105
7, 109, 112, 117-20, 122, 124-
Sadanganpadi (Tranquebar)
6, 130, 132-5, 138, 175-8,
m1, 325
180, 183-4, 187, 196, 205,
Sadras (Sadurangapattinam)
212, 219, 223, 230, 331-4,
132, 230, 325
352, 374, 376, 397, 425
Sadurangapattinam
See Sadras
post Sangam 17, 37, 102,
Saidapet 131
130, 177, 333, 347, 390
Index/ 479
Sangara 116 Siam 56, 322
Sangha 14-15 Stkhara 429
Sangramanallur 70 Silappadikaram 17, 100, 103, 107,
Sankara 398 115, 120, 122, 126, 128, 177-
Sankara matha 129, 344-5 8, 182, 187, 193-5
Sankarappadi 381 Simhavarma Pallava 391
Sankarappadi nagaram 46, 228, Simhavisnu 334, 390, 395
Simhavisnu caturvedimangalam
326, 382
Sankarappadi nagarattar 217 (Kancanur) 334, 400
Santhome 399 Sine Viet 6
Sanur 182 Singer, Milton 2, 372
Sarangapani temple 339, 343-5 Siravalli See Basinikonda
Sarasvati 429 Sir kali 227, 231, 352
Sarasvati bhandara 211 Siruttondar 431
Sarthavaha 32 Sita 344
Satavahana (pre) 10 Sittannavasal 223, 317
Satavahana(s) 15-16, 34-5, 92, Siva 43, 210-11, 231, 324, 335,
98-9, 390 339-40, 342-3, 346-7, 350,
Satiyaputras (Satiyaputo) 93, 138 356, 399-400, 427, 429-31,
Sattum Parisatta nagaram 46, 433-5
Ardhanarisvara (Siva) 429
217, 326
Sattar See Vanavanmadevipuram Bhairava (Siva) 429, 433-4
Saurashtra 209, 227, 349, 354 Bhiksatana (Siva) 429, 434
Savakam 115 Candrasékhara (Siva) 429,
Sawyerpuram 124 432
Kalantaka (Siva) 429
Sayavanam 127
Nataraja (Siva) 339, 429,
Schachar, A. 3
Seleucids 187 431, 434-5
Schwindler, GarryJ . 429-30 Rivananugrahamarti (Siva)
Sembiyanmahadevi 428, 431 435
Taduttatkondadeva (Siva) 434
senatyar 348, 350
Tripurantaka (Siva) 429-31,
stnapati 386
Séngalipuram 326 433, 435
Virabhadra (Siva) 429
Sengol 312
Sennimalai 136 Siva brahmanas 380
Sermadévi See Céravanmahadevi Sivadharma 340
caturvedimangalam Sivaganga 315
Seruvalaimangalam See Sivapadasekhara See Rajaraja |
Sivapuri 224
Virificipuram
Sharma, R.S. 10-11 Sivayam (Ratnagiri, Tiruvatpok-
Shikarpur inscription 323, 325 ki) 326
Sivayogins 337
Shimoga 323
480 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
sudra 377, 397
Sjoberg, G. 2, 4
Skinner, G. William 213 Sultanate (pre) 8
Smrti(s) 12 Sumatra 56, 322-3, 348
Sélamaligai 333, 347 Sundara Cola 348, 395
Solaniyamam 393 Sundarar 434
Soma 426 Suradalam 70, 326
Somanatha 339 Surattur nadu 399
Somanathamangalam 338 Suttukkéni 189
Somanatha temple 346 svadesi 50
Somesvara temple 338 Svamimalai 355
Sopatma (Marakkanam) 105,
140, 230 Tai Pusam (festival) 351
South Arcot 95, 138, 140, 212- Taiyur 230
13, 2iGa22/, 231, 317 takali 188
352, 356, 374 Takatur (Dharmapuri) 93, 138,
Spencer, George W. 59, 67, 221, 225
231, 430, 432 Takkolam 430
Spodek, Howard 3 Takua Pa
Sramanic 100-1, 119, 122 inscription 56, 214
S1t Bhandaram 338 excavations 222
Srikaryam 435 Talaikkadu See Talakkadu
Sri Lanka (Ilam) 6, 34, 50-1, 64, talaivan 31
92, 105, 108, 111, 114-16, Talakaveri 192
124, 129, 133, 135, 140, 180, Talakkadu (Talaikkadu,
182-4, 191, 193, 211, 214, Rajarajapura) 51, 226, 317
221-4, 311, 318, 320, 322, tala 428
_ 324, 354, 426, 432
talt-p-partvaram 62, 435
Srimalas 13 talippendu 436
Srimusnam 227 Tamaraippakkam 53, 387-8
Srinivasan, K.R. 429 Tamil 8, 10, 15-16, 26-7, 29-
Srinivasanallir 428
30, 32-8, 41, 45-7, 49, 51,
Srirangam 66, 72, 231, 356, 55, 59-60, 69, 71, 93-4, 99-
S97 aan
101, 107-10, 113-15, 117,
Sri Vaisnava 71, 344, 397 122, 124-5, 135, 137-9, 175-
Sri Vijaya 51, 222, 318, 348 7, 179-88, 190-1, 193-6, 217-
Stein, Burton 203-4, 352, 430, 19, 221-3, 315-16, 318, 321,
432
323-4, 371, 373, 377, 388,
Sthalapurana 72
390, 397-8, 400, 435
sthapati 355, 428-9
Tamilakam 9-11, 15, 17, 92-5,
stupa 15, 99, 130
98-9, 103-4, 109, 113-17, 122,
Subbarayalu, Y. 204 129, 134-5, 139, 178, 181-2,
Subrahmanya 60, 427
185, 187-91, 193-4, 196
Index J 481
Tamil-Brahmi 34, 97, 100-1, Tiberius 115
107-8, 116, 119, 123, 130, Tigulas 46
136, 189, 195, 223, 316 Tillai 433-5
Tamil Nadu 15-16, 34, 51, 55, Tillaiyadi 227
tinai 26-8, 31, 35, 60, 95-6, 101-
110-11, 205, 209, 218, 220-
1, 225-7, 313, 315-16, 320, 2, 116, 177-8, 180, 191-2
322-3, 325-6, 333, 335, 338, Tindivanam See Mavilankai
341, 347, 351-5, 357, 385, Tiraimur 208, 338-9, 350, 354
388 Tiraimtr nadu 338, 341
Tamraparni (River) 26, 38, 66, Tiraiyan 65
94, 124, 184, 210-11, 318- Tiratyar 38, 94, 129, 132, 390
tirtha(s) 12, 66, 349, 437
19, 325, 399
Tandantottam 334 tirthayatra 12
Tanjai Alagar 430-1 Tiruccattimurram 346, 349
Tanjavur (Tanjai) 15, 52, 61-4, Tiruccengodu 318
66, 70-1, 126, 208, 213, 215, Tiruccorrutturai 318
223, 226-7, 229, 232, 319, tiruccurralat 427
322, 334-5, 342, 344, 348- Tiruccuram (Trisdlam) 399
Tiruchendur See Manavirappat-
52, 355-6, 371, 398, 424-6,
428-32, 434, 436-7 tinam
Tanjavir Peruvali 352 Tiruchirapalli 118, 125-6, 216,
tan-kuru (tantyur) 67, 212, 356, 218, 226, 317, 319, 326, 351,
378-81, 400 356
Tirukkaccir 382
tapasvin (tapasyas) 380, 434
Taprobane 140 Tirukkaccur Siva temple 382
taragu 53
Tirukkalukkunram 44, 67, 212,
380
tataka 375
Tirukkampuliydr 17
tavalam 224
Tirukkarugavar (Mannaikonda-
Taxila 3
Teltki 47, 217, 326
colapattinam, Tirukkalavar)
231, 335-6, 342
Telugu 343
Tenkalat 71, 345, 397
Tirukkoligvaram Udaiyar 344
Tenkarai inscription 229
Tirukkéttiyar Maniyambalam
Ten Tiruvéngadam See Kari- 316
silndamangalam
Tirukkoyilar (Kovalir/Kilur
teral (wine) 188
Tirukk6évalur) 44, 138, 228,
326
terinda-haikkola (terifija) 211,
tirumadaivilagam 57, 67-8, 218,
337, 348
Téevaram 336, 342, 349-50, 430- 227, 322, 380, 386
2, 434-5
Tirumalagandarkottai (Idaivali)
219
Thailand 116
Tirumalai 53, 315, 319
Theodesius 133
482 / Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Tirumalarajan (River) 332-3, Tiruvattiyur 389
Tiruvayppadi Nattavar 389
336, 345
Tirumalisai 399 Tiruvellarai 32, 351
Tirumangai Alvar 346 Tiruvélvikkudi 318
tirumeni 433 Tiruvéndipuram 230
Tirumular 350 Tiruvenkadu 349
Tirumullaivayil 400 Tiruvérkadu 400
Tirumuruganpundi 228 Tiruvidaimarudir 204, 318,
Tirumurukarruppatai 60 334, 340, 348, 350, 354
Tirunagesvaram See Kumaramar- Tiruvisalir 350
ttandapuram Tiruvorriydr 385, 395, 399-401
Tirunallaru 318 Tisai Ayirattu Aififtrruvar
Tirunaraiyur nadu 341, 345-6 (Nanadesi/NanadeSiya) 47-8,
Tirunatharkunru 130 50, 210, 218, 221, 224, 226,
Tirunelveli 46, 66, 69-70, 123, 229, 311, 314-15, 351, 354,
186, 210, 216, 218-19, 224, 356, 384-5, 387, 393, 399
226-7, 317-18, 345 Tolkappiyam 32, 97
Tiruninriyir 434 Tondaiman 129
Tirunirmalai 399 Tondaimandalam 63, 213-14,
Tirupati 72, 231, 356, 397 317-18, 371, 373-4, 384-5,
Tiruppalaivanam (Pulicat) 230, 387-9, 392, 395-8, 401
325, 385, 400 Tondaimandala-s‘atakam 374
Tirupparankunram 123 Tondainadu 94, 131-2, 189,
Tirupparuttikkunram 391 373-4, 378, 380, 382-4, 388,
Tiruppurambiyam 318, 333, 354 391-2, 394
Tiruttondar Tiruvandadi 434 Tondai nadu vagai Seida
Tiruvadandai 230 udaiyar 373
Tiruvadigai (Adirajaman- Tondaiyar 131
galyapuram Tiruvadi) 44, Tondi (Tittandatanapuram) 47,
213-14
52-3, 105, 134, 184, 186-7,
Tiruvalamculi 336, 340-2, 353, 224-5, 230, 316, 324-5, 394
355
Tranquebar See Sadanganpadi
Tiruvalangadu grant 348 Travancore 49, 62, 186, 436
Tiruvalidayam 400 Tribhuvani (Tribhuvanamaha-
Tiruvalisvaram 70, 210, 318 devicaturvedimangalam) 212
Tiruvallikkeni 399 Trichur 120
Tiruvaficaikkalam 118, 434-5 triratna 119
Tiruvanmiyir 399 Trigtlam See Tiruccuram
Tiruvannamalai 66, 7a, 212, Ts’ien han Chou 131
231, 437
tuhil 182
Tiruvardr 349 Tukkalivallam 341
Tiruvatpokki See Sivayam tulaippon 338
Index J 483
tambu 376 Vadavaru (River) 62, 332, 334,
Tungabhadra (River) 71 337
turai 98 Vagur See Bahur
Tuvarankuricci 319 vaidurya 183
Tyndis 105, 139, 179, 186 Vaidya 69
Vaigai (River) 26, 94, 122, 133,
Ubhaya Nanddes: 50, 314 140, 316
Udaiyarkudi 212 Vatkhanasas 380
Udayacandra 333 Vaisnava 66, 71, 211-12, 222,
Ukkirankottai See Karavanda- 331, 335-6, 339, 343-5, 381,
puram 391, 396-7
ula \iterature 62 Vaisnavism 60-1, 390, 395, 397
ulgu porul 29 vaisya 42, 223, 388-9
ullalai 63, 436 Valainar 32, 195
Valanddu 378, 432
umanaccattu 106
Valangai 56, 229, 321, 387
umanar 32, 106, 195
Umbala nadu 41, 231 Valanyiyar 48, 50, 212, 218, 224,
Unir (Nellin Unir) 134 311, 314, 319, 354, 384-5,
upana (upapitha) 428 399
uppu vanikan 107 valanjtyatti-taniceettu 53
ar 40, 45, 58, 98, 204, 332, 375,
valarpuram (vélarpuram) 56, 224
Valikandapuram 326
_ 383, 432
Uragam temple 393 Vallam 65, 426
Vallalarkoyil 345
Uraiyur 18, 26, 29, 49, 94-5,
100, 118, 125-6, 140, 182, Valentine II 133
193, 216, 218, 334, 352, 384, Valuti (valutiy/Peruvalutiy) 112,
390, 425 123
Uraiyir Manigramam 49, 312 vambalar 106, 195
Uraiyur Ilampon Vanikanar vambu-nirat-mudinar 106
Vanagiri 127-8
107, 193
Uttama (a class of temple) 427 Vanak6ppadi, chieftaincy 374
Vanavanmahadévicaturvedi-
Uttama Cola 227, 338, 382,
mangalam 380, 399
393
Uttirameérar (Uttaramérur) 212,
Vanavanmadeévipuram (Sattur)
225
379
Vanici (Vaficimanagaram,
uvaccas 351, 380
Karuvur/Karur) 17-18, 26,
uyarndor 30-1, 97
94, 103, 115, 118, 120, 183,
Vadakalai 71, 345, 397 190, 235
Vadakalavali nadu 316 Vafici Murram See Vanici
vangam 116
Vadamalai 189
Vanikaccattu 31
Vadatali 345
484 “4 Trade, Ideology and Urbanization
Vanika-grama 49, 127-8 Vellaivinayaka caturvedimanga-
vanikar (vanigar) 106, 121, 195 lam 341
Vaniyambadi 183 Vellaiyaniruppu 127
Vaniya nagaram (Vélangudi) 46- Vellalar 119
7, 217, 225, 42@, 382, 388, x vellan-vagai 352
394 Vellodu inscription 229
Vantiya nagarattar 217, 220, 228 Véembarrur 316
Vaniyar 382, 388, 400 Véembatti See Vikramacolapuram
Vanpulam 96 Venad 49
Varadarajasvami temple 392, 397 vendan 101
Vartyam 39, 376, 380 Vendar 26-8, 31, 35-7, 97-8,
varna 12, 17, 32-3, 35, 42-3, 128, 196, 205
61, 93, 97, 109, 377, 388 Véngala Nadu 228, 322
Varnasrama 35, 99 Vengi 51
Varnasramadharma 14, 99 Venkata V 344
Varoca 323 Vennadu 341
Varuna (Varunan) 101, 426 Vennaru (River) 62
Varuni 137 Vettaru (River) 332
Vasavasamudram 95, 111, 132- Vienna papyrus 108
3, 182, 188, 390 vihara 15, 51, 99, 120, 128, 130,
vassa 100 222, 356
vaykkal 332 vijaya abhiseka 349
Vayalur 132, 213, 390 Vijayalaya 63, 334, 347, 376,
Vayu 426 400, 425
Vedaranyam 231 Vijayamangalam 228
Vedas 431
Vijayanagar 41, 69, 71, 227, 325-
Vedic 27, 38, 99, 122, 212, 391 6, 336, 339-40, 342-4, 346-7,
Veghavati (River) (Vehka) 131- 349, 353, 355, 383, 386-7,
2, 213, 374 394
Velaikkara 50
post-Vijayanagar 227, 387
Velalas 31, 39, 42, 56, 71, 206, pre-Vijayanagar 57, 371
209, 218, 221, 229, 321, 337, Vijayavada 217
375, 377, 387-8 Vikrama Cola 216, 219
Velam 337, 340, 342, 348, Sluis Vikramacolapuram (Vembatti)
436
219, 226
Velangudi See Vaniya nagaram vilainar 106
Velapuram 323-4 Villupuram (Jananatha Catur-
Veliccéri (Dinacintamani Catur- vedimangalam) 212
vedimangalam) 399
vimana 64, 68, 336, 339, 380,
Velir 29, 31, 93-4, 97-8, 108, 427-30, 433
114, 135, 138-9, 196 Vinayaka 339
Vellaivinayaka 341 Vindanur nagaram 210
Index J 485
Vindhyas 183 Visista-advaita 397
Viracola See Parantaka | Visnu 60, 65, 131, 211, 226,
Viracolanaru 332 317, 335, 339, 342-4, 346-7,
Viracdlapattinam 230, 325 392, 397, 399, 429, 431
Viracolappérangadi 212 Visnuvardhana (Hoysala)
Viradalam 70, 326 226
Virakosattar 314 Vriddhacala (Vriddhachalam)
Vira Narasimha 344 349
Vira Saiva matha (Hiriya
matha) 344 Weber, Max 4-5, 372
Virai Veliyan Venman 135 Western Ghats 34
Virampattinam See Arikamédu Wheatley, Paul 4, 6,-8, 372
Virasoltyam 348 Wou (Chinese Emperor) 131
Vira Valanjtyar 50, 226, 314
Virincipuram (Seruvalaimanga- Yadavas 135, 389
lam) 44, 213-14 Yadu Balabhuti-y 135
Virudarajabhayankaresvaram yajna 99
Udaiyar temple 347 Yama 426
Virupanna Udatyar 343 Yavanas 33, 104, 108-9, 116,
Visakhapattinam (Kulottunga 120, 122, 127, 178, 186, 188,
Colanpattinam) 51-2, 219, 193
223, 318, 385
Visakhi 137 Zvelebil, Kamil 177
db bt)‘ S tha bel4
NATIONAL LAW SCHOOL OF INDIA -
UNIVERSITY LIBRARY
NAGARABHAVI, BANGALORE - 560 072.
This book must be returned by the date stamped below
P.T.O.
| 28942
| 307.76 CHA
Bell
; ; : |
hBil iii i
28942
=>
:
OXFORD INDIA PAPERBACKS
a— e
TRADE, IDEOLOGY AND URBANIZATION
South India 300 BC to AD 1300
R. CHAMPAKALAKSHMI
In Trade, Ideology and Urbanization, Professor Champakalakshmi
discusses urbanism not merely in terms of economy and demography
but also as a function of Cola imperialism and Bhakti ideology. She
argues that the last two factors are as central to urban growth as the
economy is generally considered to be.
This book is based on extensive fieldwork in Tanjavur,
Kumbhakonam and Kanchipuram, and is the result of the author’s
ongoing interest in temple towns, their inscriptions, iconography and
architecture.
Excerpts from reviews
‘This scholarly work fills the void in regional urban history of
Tamilnadu. ...[{It] is the culmination of productive urban historical
research and teaching over a period of years, supported by field
investigations in the river and coastal plains of Tamilnadu.’
B. Arunachalam, /ndian Review of Books
‘Champakalakshmi’s book is a major contribution to South Indian
history, covering a range of social and economic processes for 1600
years, 300 BC to 1300 AD.”
Uma Chakravarti, Biblio
R. Champakalakshmi was Professor at the Centre for Historical
Studies, Jawaharlal Nehru University, Delhi.
Cover illustration by N. Ramakrishnan
ISBN 0-19-5648?
OXFORD |
UNIVERSITY PRESS
978019516487
WWW.OUp.com
